Dietary Supplements | FDA

Skip to main content

Skip to FDA Search

Skip to in this section menu

Skip to footer links

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know 

The .gov means it’s official.
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you're on a federal government site.

The site is secure.
 The 
https://
 ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.

Recall Alert
An update on the Cyclospora outbreak available 
here
.

Search

Menu

Search FDA

Submit search

Featured

Report a Product Problem

Contact FDA

FDA Guidance Documents

Recalls, Market Withdrawals and Safety Alerts

Press Announcements

Warning Letters

Advisory Committees

En Español

Products

Food

Drugs

Medical Devices

Radiation-Emitting Products

Vaccines, Blood, and Biologics

Animal and Veterinary

Cosmetics

Tobacco Products

Topics

About FDA

Combination Products

Regulatory Information

Safety

Emergency Preparedness

International Programs

News and Events

Training and Continuing Education

Inspections and Compliance

Science and Research

Information For

Consumers

Patients

Industry

Health Professionals

Federal, State and Local Officials

Home

Food

Dietary Supplements

 Food

In this section

Dietary Supplements

How to Report a Problem with Dietary Supplements

Information for Consumers on Using Dietary Supplements

Information for Industry on Dietary Supplements

Information on Select Dietary Supplement Ingredients and Other Substances

New Dietary Ingredient (NDI) Notification Process

Dietary Supplements

Dietary Supplements

How to Report a Problem with Dietary Supplements

Information for Consumers on Using Dietary Supplements

Information for Industry on Dietary Supplements

Information on Select Dietary Supplement Ingredients and Other Substances

New Dietary Ingredient (NDI) Notification Process

The work of the FDA for dietary supplement oversight is coordinated by the 
Human Foods Program’s Office of Food Chemical Safety, Dietary Supplements, and Innovation
. 

FDA regulates both finished dietary supplement products and dietary ingredients. FDA regulates dietary supplements under a different set of regulations than those covering "conventional" foods and drug products. Under the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994 (DSHEA):

Manufacturers and distributors of dietary supplements and dietary ingredients are prohibited from marketing products that are adulterated or misbranded.  That means that these firms are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet all the requirements of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act as amended by DSHEA and FDA regulations.

FDA has the authority to take action against any adulterated or misbranded dietary supplement product after it reaches the market.

What's New in Dietary Supplements

Links to constituent updates, press releases, and other actions taken on dietary supplements and products marketed as dietary supplements, including warning letters and recalls.

Information on Select Dietary Supplement Ingredients and Other Substances

A directory of FDA actions and communications.

How to Report a Problem with Dietary Supplements

Learn how consumers, health care providers, and others can report a complaint, concern, or problem related to dietary supplements. Includes links to guidance for dietary supplement manufacturers, packers, and distributors.

Information for Consumers on Using Dietary Supplements

Includes consumer updates, information from other agencies, and other educational materials for dietary supplement users.

Supplement Your Knowledge

Dietary Supplement Education Initiative

Information for Industry on Dietary Supplements

Resources and links for submissions for new dietary ingredient notifications and structure/function claim notifications, applications, guidances and regulations, and other items of interest to industry members.

New Dietary Ingredient Notification Process

 Background information for industry, instructions for submitting premarket notifications, and links to relevant guidance and Federal Register documents.

Notifications for Structure/Function and Related Claims in Dietary Supplement Labeling

 Background information for industry, instructions for submitting notifications, and links to relevant guidance and Federal Register documents.

Contact FDA

Office of Dietary Supplement Programs, HFS-810

Food and Drug Administration

5001 Campus Dr

College Park, MD 20740

To contact the Office of Dietary Supplement Programs, email: 
ODSP@fda.hhs.gov

To reach FDA’s Food and Cosmetics Information Center, call: 1-888-SAFEFOOD (1-888-723-3366)

Content current as of:

10/01/2024

Regulated Product(s)

Dietary Supplements

Feedback

FDA Archive

About FDA

Accessibility

Visitor Information

Website Policies / Privacy

No FEAR Act

Vulnerability Disclosure Policy

FOIA

HHS.gov

USA.gov

Contact FDA

Follow FDA on Facebook

Follow FDA on X

Follow FDA on Instagram

Follow FDA on LinkedIn

View FDA videos on YouTube

Subscribe to FDA RSS feeds

Contact Number

 1-888-INFO-FDA (1-888-463-6332)

Back to 
Top