Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 

*THE DRUGS RULES, 19451 
[21st December, 1945] 
[As amended vide G.S.R. 360(E) dated 01-07-2024 (w.e.f. 01-07-2024)] 

DISCLAIMER 

1. This document is a compiled version of the various amendment to the 
Drug Rules, 1945, as published through various gazette notifications over 
time. 
2. Atmost care has been taken to ensure correctness of these provisions. 
However, in case of any discrepancy observed, it may be immediately 
brought to the notice of Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 
(CDSCO). 
3. The rules governing the regulation of Ayush drugs are published by the 
Ministry of Ayush.. Any discrepancy regarding these rules may be 
reported accordingly. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
*THE DRUGS RULES, 19451 
[21st December, 1945] 
[As amended vide G.S.R. 823(E) dated 17-11-2022 (w.e.f. 01-08-2023] 

In exercise of the powers conferred by 2[sections 6(2), 12, 33 and 33(N)] of 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940), the Central Government is 
pleased to make the following Rules:— 

PART I 
PRELIMINARY 

1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) These Rules may be 
called the Drugs 3[***] Rules, 1945. 
(2) They extend to the whole of India 4[***]. 
5[***] 
2. Definitions.—In these Rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context— 
(a) "the Act" means the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940), as 
amended from time to time; 
6[(aa) "biopharmaceutical cl assification system" means a system used to 
classify drugs on the basis of solubility and permeability, classified as 
category I -high solubility and high permeability, category II -low 
solubility and high permeability, category I II-high solubility and low 
permeability, and category IV-low solubility and low permeability;] 
7[(b) "Central Licence Approving Authority" means the Drugs Controller, 
India, or the Joint Drugs Controller (India) or the Deputy Drugs 
Controller (India) appointed by the Central Government;] 
(c) "Director" means the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory; 
(d) "Form" means a Form set forth in Schedule A; 
8[(dd) "Homoeopathic medicines" include any drug which is recorded in 
Homoeopathic provings or therapeutic efficacy of which has been 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
established through long clinical experience as recorded in authoritative 
Homoeopathic literature of India and abroad and which is prepared 
according to the techniques of Homoeopathic pharmacy and cov ers 
combination of ingredients of such Homoeopathic medicines but does not 
include a medicine which is administered by parenteral route;] 
(e) "Laboratory" means the Central Drugs Laboratory; 
9[(ea) "Marketer" means a person who as an agent or in any other 
capacityadopts any drug manufactured by another manufacturer under an 
agreement for marketing of such drug by labeling or affixing his name on 
the label of the drug with a view for its sale and distribution;] 
10[11[(eb)] "registered Homoeopathic medical practitioner" means a 
person who is registered in the Central Register or a State Register of 
Homeopathy;] 
12[13[(ec)] "Phytopharmaceutical drug" includes purified and standardised 
fraction with defined minimum four bio -active or phyto -chemical 
compounds (qualitatively and quantitatively assessed) of an extract of a 
medicinal plant or its part, for internal or external use of hu man beings or 
animals for diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of any disease 
or disorder but does not include administration by parenteral route.] 
14[(ee) "Registered medical practitioner" means a person— 
(i) holding a qualification granted by an authority specified or 
notified under section 3 of the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916 
(7 of 1916), or specified in the Schedules to the Indian Medical 
Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956); or 
(ii) registered or eligible for registration in a medical register of a 
State meant for the registration of persons practicing the modern 
scientific system of medicine 15[excluding the Homoeopathic 
system of medicine]; or 
(iii) registered in a medical register 15[other than a register for the 
registration of Homoeopathic practitioners] of a State, who 
although not falling within sub -clause (i) or sub -clause (ii) is 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
declared by a general or special order made by the State 
Government in this b ehalf as a person practicing the modern 
scientific system of medicine for the purposes of this Act; or 
(iv) registered or eligible for registration in the register of dentists 
for a State under the Dentists Act, 1948 (16 of 1948); or 
(v) who is engag ed in the practice of veterinary medicine and 
who possesses qualifications approved by the State Government;] 
16[(f) 'retail sale' means a sale 17[whether to a hospital, or a dispensary, or 
a medical, edu cational or research institute or to any other person] other 
than a sale by way of wholesale dealing;] 
18[(g) 'sale by way of wholesale dealing' means sale to a person for the 
purpose of selling again and includes sale to a hospit al, dispensary, 
medical, educational or research institution;] 
19[(h) "Schedule" means a Schedule to these Rules;] 
18[(i) State Government in relation to a Union Territory means the 
Administrator thereof;] 
20[***] 
PART II 
THE CENTRAL DRUGS LABORATORY 

3. Functions.—Itshall be the function of the Laboratory— 
(i) to analyse or test such samples of drugs as may be sent to it under sub-
section (2) of section 11, or under sub -section ( 4) of section 25 of the 
Act; 
[***]21 
(iii) to carry out such other duties as may be entrusted to it by the Central 
Government or, with the permission of the Central Government, by a 
State Government after consultation with the Dru gs Technical Advisory 
Board. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
22[3A. (1) The functions of the Laboratory in respect of the following drugs or 
classes of drugs shall be carried out at the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, 
and the functions of the Director in re spect of the said drugs or classes of drugs 
shall be exercised by the Director of the said Institute:— 

23[Provided that the functions of the Director in respect of Oral Polio 
Vaccine shall be exercised by the Deputy Director and Head of the Polio 
Vaccine Testing Laboratory in case of Central Research Institute, Kasauli only.] 
24[(1A) The functions of the Laboratory in respect of Oral Polio Vaccine 
shall be carried out by the following Institutes and the functions of the Director 
in respect of the said drugs shall be exercised by the Director of the respective 
Institutes:— 
(a) Pasteur Institute of India, Conoor. 
(b) Enterovirus Research Centre (Indian Council of Medical Research), 
Haffkine Institute Compound, Parel, Bombay-400012.] 
25[(c) The National Institute of Biologicals, NOIDA.] 
26[(2) The functions of the Laboratory in respect of the following drugs or 
classes of drugs shall be carried out at the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, 
Izatnager or Mukteshwar and the functions of the Director in respect of the said 
drugs or classes of drugs shall be exercised by the Director of either of the said 
institutes:— 
(1) Anti-sera for veterinary use. 
(1) Sera 
(2) Solution of serum proteins intended for injection 
(3) Vaccines 
(4) Toxins 
(5) Antigens 
(6) Anti-toxins 
(7) Sterilized surgical ligature and sterilized surgical suture 
(8) Bacteriophages: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(2) Vaccines for veterinary use. 
(3) Toxoids for veterinary use. 
(4) Diagnostic Antigens for veterinary use.] 
27[(3) The functions of the laboratory in respect of testing of condoms shall 
be carried out at the Central Drugs Testing Laboratory, Chennai, and the 
functions of the Director in respect of the said products shall be exercised by the 
Director of the said Laboratory.] 
28[29 [(4)] The functions of the Laboratory in respect of the following drugs 
shall be carried out at the Laboratory of the Serologist and Chemical Examiner 
to the Government of India, Calcutta and the functions of the Director in respect 
of the said drugs shall be performed by the Serologist and Chemical Examiner 
of the said Laboratory:— 
VDRL Antigen.] 
30[(5) The function of the Laboratory in respect of Intra -utrine Devices and 
Falope Rings shall be carried out at the Central Drugs Testing Laboratory, 
Thane, Maharashtra and the functions of the Director in respect of t he said 
devices shall be exercised by the Director of the said Laboratory.] 
31[(6) The functions of the Laboratory in respect of human blood and 
human blood products including components, to test for freedom from HIV 
antibodies, s hall be carried out by the following Institute/Hospitals and the 
functions of the Director in respect of the above mentioned products shall be 
exercised by the head of the respective institute, namely: 
(a) National Institute of Communicable Disease, Dep artment of 
Microbiology,Delhi. 
(b) National Institute of Virology, Pune. 
(c) Centre for Advanced Research in Virology, Christian Medical 
College, Vellore.] 
32[(7) The functions of the Laboratory in respect of Homoeopathic 
medicines shall becarried out at the 33[Pharmacopoeia Commission of Indian 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Medicine and Homoeopathy at Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh)] and the functions of 
the Director in respect of the Homoeopathic medicines shall be exercised by the 
Director of the Laboratory.] 
34[(8) (a) The functions of the Laboratory in respect of the following kits or 
class of drugs shall be carried out at the National Institute of Biologicals, Noida 
and the functions of the Director in r espect of the said drugs or class of drugs 
shall be exercised by the Director of the said institute. 
(b) The kits or class of drugs referred to in clause (a) are— 
(1) Blood grouping reagents. 
(2) Diagnostic kits for human immunodeficiency virus, Hepatitis B Surface 
Antigen and Hepatitis C Virus. 
(3) Blood products— 
(a) Human Albumin; 
(b) Human normal Immunoglobulin (intramuscular and intravenous); 
(c) Human Coagulation Factor VIII; 
(d) Human Coagulation Factor IX; 
(e) Plasma Protein Fractionation; 
(f) Fibrin Sealant Kit; 
(g) Anti Inhibitor Coagulation complex. 
(4) Recombinant products such as— 
(a) Recombinant Insulin and Insulin analogues; 
(b) r-erythropoietin (EPO); 
(c) r-Granulocyte Colony Stimulating Factor (G-CSF). 
(5) Biochemical kits— 
(a) Glucose Test Strips; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) Fully automated analyzer based glucose reagents.]] 
35[(6) Enzyme and Hormones such as— 
(a) Streptokinase (Natural and Recombinant); 
(b) Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (hCG); 
(c) Human Menopausal Gonadotropin (hMG). 
(7) Bacterial vaccine such as— 
(a) Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine. 
(8) Viral vaccines such as— 
(a) Live attenuated Measles vaccine; 
(b) Live attenuated Rubella vaccine; 
(c) Cell culture Rabies vaccine.] 
36[(9) The functions of the laboratory in respect of testing of the following 
veterinary vaccines shall be carried out at the Chaudhary Charan Singh National 
Institute of Animal Health, Baghpat, Uttar Pradesh and the fu nctions of the 
Director in respect of the said veterinary vaccines shall be exercised by the 
Director of the said Institute, namely:— 
(i) Haemorrhagic Septicaemia vaccine; 
(ii) Ranikhet Disease vaccine.] 
4. Despatch of samples for test or analysis .—(1) Samples for test or 
analysis under sub -section (4) of section 25 of the Act shall be sent by 
registered post in a sealed packet, enclosed, together with a memorandum in 
Form 1, in an outer cover addressed to the Director. 
(2) The packet as well as the outer cover, shall be marked with a 
distinguishing number. 
(3) A copy of the memorandum in Form 1 and a specimen impression of 
the seal used to seal the packet shall be sent separately by registered post to the 
Director. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
5. Recording of condition of seals.—On receipt of the packet, it shall be 
opened by an officer authorised in writing in that behalf by the Director, who 
shall record the condition of the seal on the packet. 
6. Report of result of test or analysis. —After test or analysis the re sult 
of the test or analysis, together with full protocols of the tests applied, shall be 
supplied forthwith to the sender in Form 2. 
7. Fees.—The fees for test and analysis shall be those specified in 
Schedule B. 
8. Signature of certificates.—Certificates issued under these Rules by the 
Laboratory shall be signed by the Director or by an officer authorised by the 
Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette to sign such 
certificates. 
PART III 
[Rules 9 to 20.—Omitted by S.R.O. 2136, dated 15th June, 195/] 
PART IV 
 37[IMPORT AND REGISTRATION] 
21. In this Part— 
38[(a) 'import licence' means either a licence in Form 10 to import drugs 
39[***], excluding those spec ified in Schedule X, or a licence in Form10A to 
import drugs specified in Schedule X;] 
(b) "licensing authority" means the authority appointed by the Central 
Government to perform the duties of the licensing authority under these rules 
and includes any person to whom the powers of a licensing authority may be 
delegated under rule 22; 
(c) "licence for examination, test or analysis" means a licence in Form 11 
to import small quantities of drugs the import of which is otherwise prohibited, 
for the purpose of examination, test or analysis. 
40[(d) 'manufacturer", includes a manufacturer of drugs, who may be a 
Company or a unit or a body corporate or any other establishment in a country 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
other than India, having its drugs manufacturi ng facilities duly approved by the 
National Regulatory Authority of that country, and who also has a free sale 
approval of the drugs approved by the said aut hority in the concerned country , 
and/or in other major countries, 
(e) "Registration Certificate" me ans a certificate issued under rule 27A by 
the licensing authority in Form 41 for registration of the premises and the drugs 
manufactured by the manufacturer meant for import into and use in India.] 
22. The licensing authority may with the approval of the Central 
Government by an order in writing delegate the 41[power to sign licences and 
Registration Certificates and] such other powers as may be specified in the 
order to any other person under his control. 
42[23.Import licences.—An import licence in Form 10 shall be required for 
43[import of drugs], excluding those specified in Schedule X, and an import 
licence in Form 10A shall be required for the import of drugs specified in 
Schedule X.] 
44[24. Form and manner of application for import licence .—(1) An 
application for an import licence shall be made to the licensing authority in 
Form 8 for drugs excluding those specified in Schedule X, and in Form 8A for 
drugs specified in Schedule X, either by the manufacturer himself having a 
valid wholesale licence for sale or distribution of drugs under these rules, or by 
the manufacturer's agent in India either having a valid licence under the rules to 
manufacture for sale of a drug or having a valid wholesale licence for sale or 
distribution of drugs under these rules, ana shall be accompanied by a licence 
fee of 45[ten thousand rupees for a single drug and an additional fee at the rate of 
one thousand rupees] for each additional drug and by an undertaking in Form 9 
duly signed by or on behalf of the manufacturer: 
Provided that in the case of any subsequent application made by the same 
importer for import licence for drugs manufactured by the same manufacturer, 
the fee to accompany each such application shall be 46[one thousand rupees] for 
each drug. 
(2) Any application for import licence in Form 8 or Form 8A, as the case 
may be, shall be accompanied by a copy of Regis tration Certificate issued in 
Form 41 under rule 27A: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Provided that in case of emergencies the licensing authority may, with the 
approval of the Central Government, issue an import licence in Form 10 or 10A, 
as the case may be, without the issuance of Regi stration Certificate under rule 
27A, for reasons to be recorded in writing: 
47[Provided further that Registration Certificate shall not be required to be 
accompanied with an application for an import licence under the rules for th e 
import of in -vitro diagnostic kits and regents, except for the diagnostic kits 
notified from time to time under sub-clause (iv) of clause (b) of section 3.] 
(3) A fee of 48[one thousand five hundred rupees shall be paid for maki ng 
amendment in the licence 49[***].] 
50[24A. Form and manner of application for Registration Certificate.— 
(1) An application for issue of a Registration Certificate shall be made to the 
licensing author ity in Form 40, either by the manufacturer himself, having a 
valid whole sale licence for sale or distribution of drugs under these rules, or by 
his authorised agent in India, either having a valid licence under the rules to 
manufacture for sale of a drug or having a valid whole sale licence for sale or 
distribution of drugs under these rules, and shall be accompanied by the fee 
specified in sub -rule (3) and the informations and undertakings specified in 
Schedules D-I and D-II duly signed by or on behalf of the manufacturer. 
(2) The authorisation by a manufacturer to bis agent in India shall be 
documented by a power of attorney executed and authenticated either in India 
before a First -Class Magistrate, or in the country of origin before such an 
equivalent authority, the certificate of which is attested by the Indian Embassy 
of the said country, and the original of the same shall be furnished alongwith the 
application for Registration Certificate. 
(3) (i) A fee of 51[ten thousand US dollars] 47[or its equivalent in Indian 
rupees] shall be paid alongwith the application in Form 40 as registration fee for 
his premises meant for manufacturing of drugs intended for import into and use 
in India. 
(ii) A fee of 52[five thousand US dollars] 47[or its equivalent in Indian rupees] 
shall be paid alongwith the application in Form 40 for the registration of a 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
single drug meant for import into and use in India and an ad ditional fee at the 
rate of 52[five thousand US dollars] for each additional drug: 
Provided that in the case of any subsequent application for registration of 
additional drugs by the same manufacturer, the fee to accompany shall be 52[five 
thousand US dollars] 47[or its equivalent in Indian rupees] for each drug. 
(4) The fees shall be paid through a Challan in the Bank of Baroda, 
Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi -110 001 or any other branch or branches of 
Bank of Baroda, or any other bank, as notified, from time to time, by the 
Central Government, to be credited under the Head of Account "0210 -Medical 
and Public Health, 04-Public Health, 104-Fees and Fines": 
Provided that in the case of any direct payment of fees by a manufacturer in 
the country of origin, the fees shall be paid through Electronic Clearance 
System (ECS) from any bank in the country of origin to the Bank of Baroda, 
Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi, through the Electronic Code of the bank in 
the Head of Account "0210 -Medical and Public Health, 04 -Public Health, 104-
Fee and Fines", and the original receipt of the said transfer shall be treated as an 
equivalent to the bank challan, subject to the approval by the Bank of Baro da 
that they have received the payment. 
(5) The applicant shall be liable for the payment of a fee of 53[twenty five 
thousand US dollars] 47[or its equivalent in Indian rupees] for expenditure as 
may be required for inspection or visit of the manufacturing premises of drugs, 
by the be required for inspection or visit of the manufacturing premises of 
drugs, by the licensing authority or by any other persons to whom powers have 
been delegated in this behalf by the licensing authority under rule 22: 
(6) The applicant shall be liable for the payment of testing fees directly to a 
testing laboratory approved by the Central Government in India or abroad, as 
may be required for examination, tests and analysis of drug. 
(7) A fee of 54[one thousand eight hundred US dollars or its equivalent in 
Indian rupees shall be paid for making amendment in the registration certificate 
or] for a duplicate copy of the Registration Certificate, if the original is defaced, 
damaged or lost. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(8) No Registration Certificate shall be required under these rules in 
respect of an inactive bulk substance to be used for a drug formulation, with or 
without pharmacopeal conformity.] 
25. Licences for import o f drugs manufactured by one manufacturer. — 
(1) A single application may be made, and a single licence may be issued, in 
respect of the import of more than one drug or class of drugs manufactured by 
the same manufacturer: 
55[Provided that the drugs or classes of drugs are manufactured at one factory 
or more than one factory functioning conjointly as a single manufacturing unit: 
Provided further that if a single manufacturer has two or more factories 
situated in different places manufacturing the same or different drugs a separate 
licence shall be required in respect of the drugs manufactured by each such 
factory.] 
56[***] 
57[25A. Conditions to be satisfied before a licence in Form 1 0 or Form 
10A is granted.—(1) A licence in Form 10 or in Form 10A shall be granted by 
the licensing authority having regard to— 
(i) the premises, where the imported substances will be stocked 
areequipped with proper storage accommodation for preserving 
 theproperties of the drugs to which the licence applies; and 
 (ii) the occupation, trade or business ordinarily carried out by the 
applicant: 
Provided that the licensing authority may refuse t o grant a licence in Form 
10A in respect of any applicant where he is satisfied,— 
(a) that the applicant has not complied with the provisions of the Act or 
these rules, or 
(b) that by reasons of— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
58[(i) his conviction under the Act or these rules or the Narcotic Drugs 
and Psycho tropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985) or the rules 
made thereunder;] 
(ii) previous suspension or cancellation of the licence granted to him, 
he is not a fit person to whom licence shall be granted. 
(2) Any person who is aggrieved by the order passed by the licensing 
authority under this rule may, within thirty days of the receipt of the order, 
appeal to the Central Government and the Central Government may after such 
enquiry into the matter as it considers necessary and after giving the appellant 
an opportunity for making a representation in the matter, make such orders in 
relation thereto as it thinks fit.] 
59[25B. Registration Certificate for import of drugs manufactured by 
one manufacturer. —(1) A single application may be made , and a single 
Registration Certificate in Form 41 may be issued in respect of the import of 
more than one drug or class of drugs, manufactured by the same manufacturer: 
Provided that the drug or classes of drugs, are manufactured at one factory or 
more than one factory functioning conjointly as a single manufacturing unit: 
Provided further that if a single manufacturer has two or more factories 
situated in different places manufacturing the same or different drugs, separate 
Registration Certificates shall be required in respect of the drugs manufactured 
by each such factory.] 
26. Conditions of import licence. —An import licence shall be subject to 
the following conditions:— 
(i) the manufacturer shall at all times observe the undertaking given by him 
or on his behalf in Form 9; 
(ii) the license shall allow any Inspector authorized by the licensing 
authority in that behalf to enter with or without notice any premises where 
the imported substance is stocked to inspect the means, if any, employed for 
testing the substance and to take samples; 
(iii) the licensee shall on request furnish to the licensing authority from 
every batch of each substance or from such batch or batches at the licensing 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
authority may from time to time specify a sample of such amount as the 
licensing authority may consider adequate fur any examination required to 
be made, and the licensee shall, if so required, furnish full protocols of the 
tests, if any, which have been applied; 
(iv) if the licensing authority so directs the licen see shall not sell or offer 
for sale any batch in respect of which a sample is or protocols are furnished 
under the last preceding sub-rule until a certificate authorizing the sale of the 
batch has been issued to him by or on behalf of the licensing authority; 
(v) the licensee shall, on being informed by the licensing authority that any 
part of any batch of the substance has been found by the licensing authority 
not to conform with the standards of strength, quality and purity prescribed 
by Chapter III of the Act, or the Rules thereunder and on being directed so to 
do, withdraw the remainder of that batch from sale and, so far as may in the 
particular circumstances of the case be practicable, recall the issues already 
made from that batch; 
(vi) the licensee shall maintain a record of all sales by him of substances 
for the import of which a license is required, showing particulars of the 
substance and of the person to whom sold and such further particulars, if 
any, as the licensing authority may specify and such record shall be open to 
the inspection of any Inspector authorized in that behalf by the licensing 
authority: 
60[Provided that in respect of the sale or distribution of drugs specified in 
Schedule X, the licensee shall maintain a separate record or register showing 
the following particulars, namely:— 
1. Name of the drug, 
2. Batch number, 
3. Name and address of the manufacturer, 
4. Date of transaction, 
5. Opening stock on the business day, 
6. Quantity of drug received, if any, and the source from which 
received, 
7. Name of the purchaser, his address and licence number, 
8. Balance quantity of drug at the end of the business day, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
9. Signature of the person under whose supervision the drugs have been 
supplied;] 
(vii) the licensee shall comply with such further requirements, if any, 
applicable to the holders of import licences, as may be specified in any rules, 
subsequently made under Chapter III of the Act and of which the licensing 
authority has given to him not less than four months' notice. 
27. Grant ofimport licence. —On receipt of an application for an 
importlicence in the Form and manner prescribed in rule 24, the 
licensing authorityshall, on being satisfied that, if g ranted, the conditions of the 
licence will be observed, issue an import licence in Form 10 60[or Form 10A, as 
the case may be], 
61[27A. Grant of Registration Certificates. —(1) On receipt for an 
application for Registration Certificate in the Form and manner specified in rule 
24A, the licensing authority shall, on being satisfied, that, if granted, the 
conditions of the Registration Certificate will be observed, issue a Registration 
Certificate inForm 41: 
Provided further that if the application is complete in all respects and 
informations specified in Schedules DI and DII are in order, the licensing 
authority shall, within nine months from the date of receipt of an application, 
issue such Registration Certi ficate, and in exceptional circumstances and for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, the Registration Certificate may be issued 
within such extended period, not exceeding three months as the licensing 
authority, may deem fit. 
(2) If the applicant does not r eceive the Registration Certificate within the 
period as specified in proviso to sub -rule (1), he may appeal to the Central 
Government and the Central Government may after such enquiry into the 
matter, as it considers necessary, may pass such orders in rel ation thereto as it 
thinks fit.] 
62[28. Duration of import licence. —A licence, unless, it is sooner 
suspended or cancelled, shall be 63[valid for a period of three years from the 
date of its issue]: Provi ded that if application for a fresh licence is made three 
months before the expiry of the existing licence the current licence shall be 
deemed to continue in force until orders are passed on the application.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
64[28A. Duration of R egistration Certificate.—A Registration Certificate, 
unless, it is sooner suspended or cancelled, shall be valid for a period of three 
years from the date of its issue: 
Provided that if the application for a fresh Registration Certificate is made 
nine months before the expiry of the existing certificate, the current Registration 
Certificate shall be deemed to continue in force until orders are passed on the 
application.] 
29. Suspension and cancellation of import licence. —If the manufacturer 
or licensee fail s to comply with any of the conditions of an import licence, the 
licensing authority may after giving the manufacturer or licensee an opportunity 
to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing 
stating the reasons therefor, sus pend or cancel it for such period as it thinks fit 
either wholly or in respect of some of the substances to which it relates: 
65[Provided that a person who is aggrieved by the order passed by the 
licensing authority under this rul e may, within thirty days of the receipt of the 
order, appeal to the Central Government, and the Central Government may, 
after such enquiry into the matter, as it considers necessary and after giving the 
said appellant an opportunity for representing his v iews, pass such orders in 
relation thereto as it thinks fit.] 
64[29A. Suspension and cancellation of Registration Certificate. —If the 
manufacturer fails to comply with any of the conditions of the Registration 
Certificate, the licensing authority may after giving him an opportunity to show 
cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the 
reasons therefor, suspend or cancel the Registration Certificate for such period 
as it thinks fit either wholly or in respect of some of the substances to which it 
relates: 
Provided that a person, who is aggrieved by the order passed by the licensing 
authority under this rule may, within thirty days of the receipt of the order, 
appeal to the Central Government, and th e Central Government may, after such 
enquiry into the matter as it considers necessary and after giving the appellant 
an opportunity for representing his views in the matter, pass such orders in 
relation thereto as it thinks fit.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
30. Prohibition of import after expiry of potency.—No biological or other 
special product specified in Schedule C or C(l) shall be imported after the date 
shown on the label, wrapper or container of the drug as the date up to which the 
drug may be expected to retain a potency not less than, or not to acquire a 
toxicity greater than, that required, or as the case may be, permitted by the 
prescribed test. 
 66[***] 
67[30AA. Import of New Homoeopathic medicines. —(1) No 
NewHomoeopathic medicine shall be imported except under and in accordance 
with the permission in writing of the Licensing Authority. 
(2) The importer of a New Homoeopathic medicine when applying for 
permission shall produce before the Licensing Authority such documentary and 
other evidence as may be required by the Licensing Authority for assessing the 
therapeutic efficacy of the medicine including the minimum provings carried 
out with it.] 
68[Explanation.—For the purpose of this rule, 'New Homoe opathic medicine' 
means,— 
(i) a Homoeopathic medicine which is not specified in the Homoeopathic 
Pharmacopoeia of India or the United States of America or the United 
Kingdom or the German Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia; or 
(ii) which is not recognized in authoritative Homoeopathic literature as 
efficacious under the conditions recommended; or 
(iii) a combination of Homoeopathic medicines containing one or more 
medicines which are not specified in any of the Pharmacopoeias referred to 
in clause (i) as H omoeopathic medicines and also not recognized in 
authoritative Homoeopathic literature as efficacious, under the conditions 
recommended.] 
69[30B. Prohibition of import of certain drugs. —No drug, the 
manufacture, sale or distribution of which is prohibited in the country of origin, 
shall be imported under the same name or under any other name except for the 
purpose of examination, test or analysis.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
70[31. Standard for certain imported drugs. —No drug shall be imported 
unless it complies with the standard of strength, quality and purity, if any, and 
the test prescribed in the rules shall be applicable for determining whether any 
such imported drug complies with the said standards: 
Provided that the drugs intended for veterinary use, the standards of strength, 
quality and purity, if any, shall be those that are specified in Schedule F(l) and 
the test prescribed in that Scheduled shall be applicable for determining whether 
any such imported drug complies with th e said standards and where no 
standards are specified in Schedule F(l) for any veterinary drug, the standards 
for such drug shall be those specified in the current edition, for the time being in 
force, of the British Pharmacopoeia Veterinary: 
Provided further that the licensing authority shall not allow the import of any 
drug having less than sixty per cent, residual shelf -life period as on the date of 
import: 
Provided also that in exceptional cases the licensing authority may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, may allow, the import of any drug having 
lesser shelf-life period, but before the date of expiry as declared on the container 
of the drug.] 
71[32, Packing and labelling of imported drugs. —No drug shall be 
imported unless it is packed and labelled in conformity with the rules in Parts 
IX and X 72[***] and further conforms to the standards laid down in Part XII 
provided that in the case of drugs intended for veterinary use, the packing and 
labelling shall conform to the rules in Parts IX and X and Schedule F(l).] 
73[32A.Packing and labelling of Homoeopathic medicine.—No 
Homoeopathic medicine shall be imported unless it is packed and labelled in 
conformity with the rules in Part IXA.] 
33.Import of drugs for examination, test or analysis. —Small quantities of 
drugs the import of which is otherwise prohibited under section 10 of the Act 
may be imported for the purpose of examination, test or analysis subject to the 
following conditions:— 
(a) no drug shall be imported for such purpose except under a licence in 
Form 11; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) the licensee shall use the substances imported under the licence 
exclusively for purposes of examination, test or analysis and shall carry 
on such examination, test or analysis in the place specified in the licence, 
or in such other places as the licensing authority may from time to time 
authorize; 
(c) the licensee shall allow any Inspector authorized by the licensing 
authority in this behalf to enter, with or without prior notice, the premises 
where the substances are kept, and to inspect the premises, and 
investigate the manner in which the substances are being used and to take 
samples thereof; 
(d) the licensee shall keep a record of, and shall repor t to the licensing 
authority, the substances imported under the licence, together with the 
quantities imported, the date of importation and the name of the 
manufacturer; 
(e) the licensee shall comply with such further requirements, if any, 
applicable to the holders of licences for examination, test or analysis as 
may be specified in any rules subsequently made under ChapterIII of the 
Act and of which the licensing authority has given to him not less than 
one month's notice. 
74[33A.Import of drugs by a Government Hospital or Autonomous 
Medical Institution for the treatment of patients. —Small quantities of a new 
drug, as defined in rule 122E, the import of which is otherwise prohibited under 
section 10 of the Act, may be imported f or treatment of patients suffering from 
life threatening diseases, or diseases causing serious permanent disability, or 
such disease requiring therapies for unmet medical needs, by a Medical Officer 
of a Government Hospital or an Autonomous Medical Institu tion providing 
tertiary care, duly certified by the Medical Superintendent of the Government 
Hospital, or Head of the Autonomous Medical Institution, subject to the 
following conditions, namely:— 
(a) no new drug shall be imported for the said purpose ex cept under a 
licence in Form 11 A, and the said drug has been approved for marketing 
in the country of origin; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) the licencee shall use the substances or drugs imported under the 
licence exclusively for the purpose of treatment of patients suffering 
from life threatening diseases, or diseases causing serious permanent 
disability, or such diseases requiring therapies for unmet medical needs, 
under the supervision of its ow i Medical Officers at the place, specified 
in the licence or at such ott er places, as the licensing authority, may from 
time to time authorise; 
(c) The licencee shall allow an Inspector authorised by the licensing 
authority in this behalf to enter, with or without prior notice, the premises 
where the substances or drugs are stocked , and to inspect the premises 
and relevant records and investigate the manner in which the substances 
or drugs are being used and to take, if necessary, samples thereof; 
(d) the licencee shall keep a record of, and shall submit the said report 
half yearly to the licensing authority, the substances or drugs imported 
under the licence, together with the quantities imported and issued to the 
patients, the date of importation, the name of the manufacturer, the name 
and address of the patient for whom th e drug is prescribed and the name 
of disease: 
(e) the licencee shall comply with such other requirements, if 
any,applicable to the holders of import licences for import of new drugs 
for treatment of patients by Government Hospitals, as may be specified 
from time to time in any rule subsequently made under Chapter III of the 
Act and of which the licensing authority has given to him not less than 
one month's notice; 
(f) the drug shall be stocked under proper storage conditions and shall 
be dispensed under the supervision of a registered pharmacist; 
(g) the quantity of any single drug so imported shall not exceed 
100average dosages per patient: 
Provided that the licensing authority may, in exceptional circumstances, 
sanction the import of drug a larger quantity.] 
34. Application for licence for examination, test or analysis. — (1) An 
application for a licence for examination, test or analysis shall be made in Form 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
12 and shall be made or countersigned by the head of the institution in which, or 
by a proprietor or director of the company or firm by which the examination, 
test or analysis will be conducted. 
(2) The licensing authority may require such further particulars to be 
supplied as he may consider necessary. 
75[(3) Every application in Form 12 shall be accompanied by a fee of 76[five 
thousand rupees for a single drug and an additional fee of two thousand rupees] 
for each additional drug.] 
(4) The fees shall be paid through a challan in the Bank of Baroda, Kasturba 
Gandhi Marg, New Delhi -110001 or any other branch or branches of Bank of 
Baroda, or any other Bank, as Notified, from time to time, by the Central 
Government, to be certified under the Head of Account "0210 —Medical and 
Public Health 04—Public Health, 104—Fees and Fine."] 
77[34A. Application for licence to import small quantities of new drugs 
by a Government Hospital or Autonomous Medical Institution for the 
treatment of patients. —(1) An application for an import licence for small 
quantities of a new drug, as defined in rule 122E for the purpose of treatment of 
patients suffering from life threatening diseases, or diseases causing serious 
permanent disability, or such diseases requiring therapies for unmet medical 
needs, shall be made in Form 12 AA, by a Medical Officer of the Government 
Hospital or Autonomous Medical Institution, which shall be certified by the 
Medical Superintendent of the Government Hospital or Head of the 
Autonomous Medical Institution, as the case may be. 
(2) The licensing authority may require such further particulars to be 
supplied, as he may consider necessary. 
(3) Every application in Form 12AA shall be accompanied by a fee of 
78[six hundred rupees for a single drug and an additional fee of three hundred 
rupees] for each additional drug. 
(4) The fees shall be paid through a challan in the Bank of Baroda, 
Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi -110001 or any other branch or branches of 
Bank of Baroda, or any other Bank , as Notified, from time to time, by the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Central Government, to be certified under the Head of Account "0210 —
Medical and Public Health, 04—Public Health, 104—Fees and Fine".] 
35. Cancellation of licence for examination, test or analysis. —(1) A 
licence f or examination, test or analysis may be cancelled by the licensing 
authority for breach of any of the conditions subject to which the licence was 
issued. 
(2) A licensee whose licence has been cancelled may appeal to the Central 
Government within three months of the date of the order. 
79[35A. Cancellation of licence for import of small quantities of new 
drugs.—(1) A licence for import of small quantities of a new drug, defined in 
rule 122E, for the purpose of the treatment of patien ts suffering from life 
threatening diseases, or diseases causing serious permanent disability, or such 
diseases requiring therapies for unmet medical needs, by a Government 
Hospital or an Autonomous Medical Institution may be cancelled by the 
licensing aut hority for breach of any of the conditions subject to which the 
licence was issued or for contravention of any of the provisions of the Act and 
rules made thereunder. 
(2) A licencee whose licence has been cancelled may appeal to the Central 
Government within three months from the date of the receipt of the order, and 
the Central Government may after such enquiry into the matter, as it considers 
necessary and after giving the appellant an opportunity for representing his 
views, may pass such orders in relation thereto, as it thinks fit.] 
36. Import of drugs for personal use. —Small quantities of drugs, the 
imports of which is otherwise prohibited under section 10 of the Act, may be 
imported for personal use subject to the following conditions:— 
(i) the drugs shall form part of a passenger's bona fide baggage and shall be 
the property of, and be intended for, the exclusive personal use of the 
passenger; 
(ii) the drugs shall be declared to the Customs authorities if they so direct; 
(iii) the quantity of any single drug so imported shall not exceed 
onehundred average doses: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Provided that the licensing authority may in an exceptional case in any 
individual case sanction the imports of a larger quantity: 
80[Provided further that any drug, imported for personal use but not forming 
part of bona fide personal baggage, may be allowed to be imported subject to 
the following conditions, namely:— 
(i) the licensing authority, on an application made to it in Form 12A 
issatisfied that the drug is for bona fide personal use; 
(ii) the quantity to be imported is reasonable in the opinion of thelicensing 
authority and is covered by prescription from a registered medical 
practitioner; and 
(iii) the licensing authority grants a permit in res pect of the said drug in 
Form 12B 81[requiring the permit holder to give details of drugs imported 
and utilised on yearly basis].] 
82[36A.Import of drugs by charitable hospital free of cost. —(1) Small 
quantity of drugs received in donation by a charitable hospital for the purpose of 
treatment of the patients in the said hospital may be imported provided the 
drugs are given or administered to the patients free of cost. 
(2) The drugs shall not be prohibited for import and permitted to be marketed 
in the country with residual shelf life of one year or more.] 
83[37. Packing of patent or proprietary medicines .—Patent or proprietary 
medicine shall be imported in containers intended for retail sale: 
84[Provided that such medicine may be imported in bulk containers by any 
person who holds a licence to manufacture, if such person has obtained 
permission in writing to import such medicines from the licensing authorit y at 
least three months prior to the date of import and the imports are made within a 
period of twelve months from the date of issue of such permission].] 
38. Statement to accompany imported drugs .—All consignments of 
drugs sought to be imported shall b e accompanied by an invoice or other 
statement showing the name and address of the manufacturer and the names and 
quantities of the drugs. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
39. Documents to be supplied to the Customs Collector. —Before drugs 
for the import of which a licence is not requi red are imported a declaration 
signed by or on behalf of the manufacturer or by or on behalf of the importer 
that the drugs comply with the provisions of Chapter III of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the rules thereunder shall be supplied to the Cus toms 
Collector. 
85[40. Procedure for the import of drugs.—(1) If the Customs Collector has 
reason to doubt whether any drugs comply with the provisions of Chapter III of 
the Act and rules thereunder he may, and if requested by any officer appointed 
for this purpose by the Central Government shall, take samples of any drugs in 
the consignment and forward them to the director of the laboratory appointed 
for this purpose by the Central Government and may detain the drugs in the 
consignment of which samples have been taken until the report of the director 
of the said laboratory or any other officer empowered by him on this behalf, 
subject to the approval of the Central Government on such samples is received: 
Provided that if the importe r gives an undertaking in writing not to dispose of 
the drugs without the consent of the Customs Collector and to return the 
consignment or such portion thereof as may be required, the Customs Collector 
shall make over the consignment to the importer. 
(2) If an importer who has given an undertaking under the proviso to subrule 
(1) is required by the Customs Collector to return the consignment or any 
portion thereof he shall return the consignment or portion thereof within ten 
days of receipt of the notice.] 
86[41. (1) If the Director of the laboratory appointed for the purpose by the 
Central Government or any other officer empowered by him on this 
behalfsubject to the approval of the Central Government reports to the Customs 
Collector that the samples of any drug in a consignment are not of standard 
quality, or that the drug contravenes in any other respect the provisions of 
Chapter III of the Act or the rules thereunder and that the contravention is such 
that it cannot be remedied b y the importer, the Customs Collector shall 
communicate the report forthwith to the importer who shall, within two months 
of his receiving the communication either export all the drugs of that description 
in the consignment, to the country in which they we re manufactured or forfeit 
them to the Central Government which shall cause them to be destroyed:] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Provided that the importer may within fifteen days of receipt of the report 
make a representation against the report to the Customs Collector, and the 
Customs Collector shall forward the representation with a further sample to the 
licensing authority, who after obtaining, if necessary, the report of the Director 
of the Central Drugs Laboratory, shall pass orders thereon which shall be final. 
87[(2) If the Director of the laboratory appointed for the purpose by the 
Central Government or any other officer empowered by him on this behalf, 
subject to the approval of the Central Government reports to the Customs 
Collector that the samples o f any drug contravene in any respect the provisions 
of Chapter III of the Act or the rules thereunder and that the contravention is 
such that it can be remedied by the importer, the Customs Collector shall 
communicate the report forthwith to the importer a nd permit him to import the 
drug on his giving an undertaking in writing not to dispose of the drug without 
the permission of the office authorised in this behalf by the Central 
Government.] 
88[***] 
43. The drugs specified in Sche dule D shall be exempt from the provisions 
of Chapter III of the Act and of the Rules made thereunder to the extent, and 
subject to the conditions specified in that Schedule. 
89[43A. NOdrug shall be imported into India except thro ugh one of the 
following places, namely:— 
Firozepur Cantonment and Amritsar Railway Stations: 
In respect of drugs imported bv rail across the frontier with Pakistan; 
Ranaghat, Bongaon and Mohiassan Railway Stations: 
In respect of drugs imported by rail across the frontier with Bangladesh; 
90[Petrapole Road in West Bengal, Sutarkandi in Assam, old Raghna Bazar and 
Agartala in Tripura: 
In respect of drugs imported by road from Bangladesh;] 
91[Raxaul: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
In resp ect of drugs imported by road and railway lines connecting Raxaul in 
India and Birganj in Nepal;] 
92[ 93[Chennai, Kolkata, Mumbai, Cochin, Nhava Sheva, Kandla, Inland 
Container Depots at Tuglakabad and Pa tparganj in Delhi, 94[Tuticorin and 
Kamrajar Port] in Tamil Nadu, Marmugao port in Goa, Visakhapatnam and 
1340[“Krishnapatnam and Gangavaram ports”] in Andhra Pradesh and Haziia 
port and Inland Container Depot Khohdiyar, 95[Gandhinagar and Mundra Port] 
in Gujarat 96[and 97[lnland Container Depot at Dhannad and Tihi], Indore in 
Madhya Pradesh]: in respect of drugs imported by sea into India;] 
Chennai, Kolkata, Mumbai, Delhi, Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, Go a, Bengaluru 
and Visakhapatnam: 
in respect of drugs imported by air into India.] 
 98[43B. Drugs, consignments of which are intransit through India to 
 foreigncountries and which shall not be sold or distributed in India shall be 
exempted from the requirements of Chapter III of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1940 (23 of 1940) and rules made thereunder: 
Provided that if the Government of the countries to w hich the drugs are 
consigned regulate their import by the grant of import licences, the importer 
shall at the time of import into India, produce such import licences.] 
PART V 
99[GOVERNMENT ANALYSTS, INSPECTORS, LICENSING 
AUTHORITIES AND CONTROLLING AUTHORITIES] 
100[44. Qualifications of Government Analyst. —A person appointed as a 
Government Analyst under the Act shall be a person who— 
(a) is a graduate in Medicine or Science or Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical 
Chemistry of a 101[University established in India by the law or has an 
equivalent qualification recognised and notified by the CentralGovernment for 
such purpose] and has had not less than five years' post-graduate experience in 
the testing of drugs in a laboratory under the control of (i) a Government 
Analyst appointed under the Act, or (ii) the head of an Institution or testing 
laboratory approved for the purpose by the appointing authority 102[or has 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
completed two years' training on testing of drugs, including items stated in 
Schedule C, in Central Drugs Laboratory], or 
(b) possesses a post -graduate degree in Medicine or Science or Pharmacy or 
Pharmaceutical Chemistry of a 101[University established in India by the law or 
has an equivalent qualification recognised and notified by the Central 
Government for such purpose] or possesses theAssociateship Diploma of the 
Institution of Chemists (India) obtained by passing the said e xamination with 
'Analysis of Drugs and Pharmaceuticals' as one of the subjects and has had after 
obtaining the said post -graduate degree or diploma not less than three Years' 
experience in the testing of drugs in a laboratory under the control of (i) a 
Government Analyst appointed under the Act, or (ii) the head of an Institution 
or testing laboratory approved for the purpose by the appointing authority 103[or 
has completed two years' training on testing of drugs, including items stated in 
Schedule C, in Central Drugs Laboratory]: 
Provided that— 
104[(i) for the purpose of examination of items in Schedule C,— 
(ia) the persons appointed under clause (a) or (b) and having degree in 
Medicine, Physiology, Pha rmacology, Microbiology, Pharmacy should 
have experience or training in testing of said items in an institution or 
laboratory approved by the appointing authority for a period of not less 
than six months; 
(ib) the person appointed under clause (a) or (b) b ut not having degree 
in the above subjects should have experience or training in testing of the 
said Schedule C drugs for a period of not less than three years in an 
institution or laboratory approved by the appointing authority or have 
completed two years training on testing of drugs including item stated in 
Schedule C in Central Drugs Laboratory;] 
(ii) for a period of four years from the date on which Chapter IV of the Act 
takes effect in the States, persons, whose training and experience are 
regarded by the appointing authority as affording, subject to such further 
training, if any, as may be considered necessary, a reasonable guarantee of 
adequate knowledge and competence may be appointed as Government 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Analysts. The persons so appointed may, if the appoi nting authority so 
desires, continue in service after the expiry of the said period of four years; 
(iii) no person who is engaged directly or indirectly in any trade or business 
connected with the manufacture of drugs shall be appointed as a Government 
Analyst for any area: 
 Provided further that for the purpose of examination of Antisera, Toxoid 
and Vaccines and Diagnostic Antigens for Veterinary use, the person appointed 
shall be a person who is a graduate in Veterinary Science, or general science, or 
medicine or pharmacy and has had not less than five years' experience in the 
standardization of biological products or a person holding a post -graduate 
degree in Veterinary Science , or General Science, or medicine or Pharmacy or 
Pharmaceutical Chemistry with an experience of not less than three years in the 
standardisation of biological products: 
Provided also that persons, already appointed as Government Analysts may 
continue to remain in service, if the appointing authority so desires, 
notwithstanding the fact that they do not fulfil the qualifications as laid down in 
clause (a), clause (b) or the preceding proviso.] 
45. Duties of Government Analysts.—(1) The Government Analyst shall 
cause to be analysed or tested such samples of drugs 105[***] as may be sent to 
him by Inspector or other persons under the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act 
and shall furnish reports of the results of test or analysis in accordance with 
these rules 106[within a period of sixty days of the receipt of the sample: 
Provided that where it is not possible to test or analyse the sample within the 
specified period, the Government Analyst shall seek extension of time from the 
Government giving specific reasons for delay in such testing or analysis.] 
(2) A Government Analyst shall from time to time forward to the 
Government reports giving the result of analytical work and research with a 
view to their publication at the discretion of Government. 
46. Procedure on receipt of sample. —On receipt of a package from an 
Inspector containing a sample for test or analysis, the Government Analyst shall 
compare the seals on the packet 107[or on portion of sample or container] with 
the specimen impression received sep arately and shall note the condition of the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
seals on the 108[packet or on portion of sample or container]. After the test or 
analysis has been completed, he shall forthwith supply to the Inspector a report 
in triplicate in Form 1 3 of the result of the test or analysis, together with full 
protocols of the tests or analysis applied. 
109[Explanation.—It shall be deemed to be full and sufficient compliance 
with the requirement of the rule in respect of the s upply of "protocols of the 
tests or analysis applied", if— 
(1) for pharmacopoeial drug, where the tests or methods of analysis 
prescribed in the official pharmacopoeia are followed, references to the 
specific tests or analysis in the pharmacopoeias are given in the report; 
(2) for patent or proprietary medicines for which the tests and methods 
prescribed in any of the official pharmacopoeias are applicable and are 
followed, references to the specific tests or analysis in the 
pharmacopoeias are given in the report; 
(3) for patent or proprietary medicines containing pharmacopoeial drugs 
for which the official tests or analysis or methods of assays are modified 
and applied, a description of the actual tests or, as the case may be, 
analysis or methods of assays so applied is given in the report; 
(4) for patent or proprietary medicines for which no pharmacopoeial 
tests or methods of analysis are available or can be applied but for which 
tests or methods of analysis given in standard books or journals are 
followed, a description of such tests or methods of analysis applied 
together with the reference to the relevant books or journals from which 
the tests or methods of analysis have been adopted, is given the report; 
(5) for those drugs for which methods of test are not available and have 
been evolved by the Government Analyst, a description of tests applied is 
given in the report.] 
47. Report of result of test or analysis.—An application from a purchaser 
for test or analysis of a drug under section 26 of the Act shall be made in Form 
14A and the report of test or analysis of the drug made on such application shall 
be supplied to the applicant in Form 14B. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
48. Fees.—The fees to be paid by a person submitting to the Government 
Analyst under section 26 of the Act for test or analysis of a drug 110[***] 
purchased by him shall be those specified in. Schedule B. 
111[49. Qualifications of Inspectors. —A person who is appointed an 
Inspector under the Act shall be a person who has a degree in Pharmacy or 
Pharmaceutical Sciences or Medicine with specialisation in Clinical 
Pharmacology or Microbiology from a University established in India by law: 
Provided that only those Inspectors— 
(i) who have not less than 18 months' experience in the manufacture of 
at least one of the substances specified in Schedule C, or 
(ii) who have not less than 18 months' experience in testing of at least 
one of the substances in Schedule C in a laboratory approved for this 
purpose by the licensing authority, or 
(iii) who have gained experience of not less than three years in the 
inspection of firm manufacturing any of the substances specified in 
Schedule C during the tenure of their services as Drugs Inspectors; 
shall be authori sed to inspect the manufacture of the substances mentioned in 
Schedule C:] 
112[Provided further that the requirement as to the academic qualification 
shall not apply to persons appointed as Inspectors on or before the 18th day of 
October, 1993.] 
113[49A. Qualification of a Licensing Authority. —No person shall be 
qualified to be a Licensing Authority under the Act unless— 
(i) he is a graduate in Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry or in 
Medicine with specialisation in Clinical Pharmacology or Microbiology 
from a University established in India by law; and 
(ii) he has experience in the manufacture or testing of drugs or 
enforcement of the provisions of the Act for a minimum period of five 
years: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
114[Provided that the requirements as to the academic qualification shall not 
apply to those Inspectors and the Government Analysts who were holding those 
positions on the 12th day of April, 1989.]] 
115[50. Controlling Authority.—(1) All Inspectors appointed by the Central 
Government shall be under the control of an officer appointed in this behalf by 
the Central Government. 
(2) All Inspectors appointed by the State Government shall be under the 
control of an officer appointed in this behalf by the State Government. 
(3) For the purposes of these rules an officer appointed by the Central 
Government under sub -rule (1), or as the case may be, an officer appointed by 
the State Government under sub-rule (2) shall be a controlling authority.] 
116[50A.Qualification of a Controlling Authority. —(1) No person shall be 
qualified to be a Controlling Authority under the Act unless— 
(i) he is a graduate in Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemi stry or in 
Medicine with specialisation in Clinical Pharmacology or Microbiology 
from a University established in India by law; and 
(ii) he has experience in the manufacture or testing of drugs or 
enforcement of the provisions of the Act for a minimum p eriod of five 
years: 
117[Provided that the requirements as to the academic qualification shall not 
apply to those Inspectors and the Government Analysts who were holding those 
positions on the 12th day of April, 1989.]] 
51. Dutie s of Inspectors of premises licensed for sale. —Subject to the 
instructions of the controlling authority, it shall be the duty of an Inspector 
authorized to inspect premises licensed for the sale of drugs— 
(1) to inspect 118[not less than once a year] all establishments licensed 
for the sale of drugs within the area assigned to him; 
(2) to satisfy himself that the conditions of the licences are being 
observed; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(3) to procure and send for test or analysis, if necessary, imp orted 
packages which he has reason to suspect contain drugs being sold or 
stocked or exhibited for sale in contravention of the provisions of the 
Act or rules thereunder; 
(4) to investigate any complaint in writing which may be made to him; 
(5) to institute prosecutions in respect of breaches of the Act and rules 
thereunder; 
(6) to maintain a record of all inspections made and action taken by 
him in the performance of his duties, including the taking of samples 
and the seizure of stocks, and to sub mit copies of such record to the 
controlling authority; 
(7) to make such enquiries and inspections as may be necessary to 
detect the sale of drugs in contravention of the Act; 
(8) when so authorized by the State Government, to detain imported 
packages w hich he has reason to suspect contain drugs, the import of 
which is prohibited. 
52. Duties of inspectors specially authorised to inspect the 
manufacture of 119[drugs 120[***]].—Subject to the instruc tions of the 
controlling authority it shall be the duty of an Inspector authorized to inspect the 
manufacture of 119[drugs 120[***]] 
(1) to inspect 121[not less than once a year], all premises licensed for 
manufacture of 119[drugs 120[***]] within the area allotted to him to 
satisfy himself that the conditions of the licence and provisions of the 
Act and Rules thereunder are being observed; 
(2) in the case of establishments licensed to manufacture products 
specified in Schedules C and C (1) to inspect the plant and the process 
of manufacture, the means employed for standardizing and testing the 
drug, the methods and pla ce of storage, the technical qualifications of 
the staff employed and all details of location, construction and 
administration of the establishment likely to affect the potency or purity 
of the product; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(3) to send forthwith to the controlling authority after each inspection 
a detailed report indicating the conditions of the licence and provisions 
of the Act and rules thereunder which are being observed and the 
conditions and provisions, if any, which are not being observed; 
(4) to take samples of the 1[drugs 2[***]] manufactured on the 
premises and send them for test or analysis in accordance with these 
Rules; 
(5) to institute prosecutions in respect of breaches of the Act and rules 
thereunder. 
53. Prohibition of disclosure of information. —Except for the purposes 
of official business or when required by a Court of law, an Inspector shall not, 
without the sanction in writing of his official superior, disclose to any person 
any information acquired by him in the course of his official duties. 
54. Form of order not to dispose of stock. —An order in writing by an 
Inspector under clause (c) of section 22 of the Act requiring a person not to 
dispose of any stock in his possession shall be in Form 15. 
122[54A. Prohibition of sale.—No person in possession of a drug 35[***] in 
respect of which an Inspector has made an order under clause (c) of sub -
section(i) of section 22 of the Act shall in contravention of that order sell or 
otherwise dispose of any stock of such drug 123[***].] 
124[55. Form of receipts for seized drugs, 125[***], record, register, 
documents or any other material objects. —A receipt by an Inspector f or the 
stock of any drug 126[***] or for any record, register, document or any other 
material object seized by him under clause (c) or clause (cc) of sub -section (1) 
of section 22 ofthe Act shall be in Form 16.] 
127[55A.Manner of certifying copies of seized documents. —The Drugs 
Inspector shall return the documents, seized by him under clause (cc), or 
produced before him under clause (cca) of sub -section (1) of section 22 of the 
Act, within a period of twenty days of the date of such seizure or production, to 
the person from whom they were seized or, as the case may be, the person who 
produced them, after copies thereof of extracts therefrom have been signed by 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
the concerned Drugs Inspector and the person from whom they were seized, or 
as the case may be, who produced such records.] 
56. Form of intimation of purpose of taking samples. —When an 
Inspector takes a sample of a drug for the purpose of test or analysis, he shall 
intimate such purpose in writing in Form 17 to the person from whom he takes 
it. 
128[56A. Form of receipt for samples of drugs where fair price tendered 
is refused. —Where the fair price, for the samples of drugs taken for the 
purpose of test or analysis, tender ed under sub -section (1) of section 23 has 
been refused, the Inspector shall tender a receipt therefor to the person from 
whom the said samples have been taken as specified in Form 17A.] 
57. Procedure for despatch of sample to Government Analyst. —(1) 
The portion of sample or the container sent by an Inspector to the Government 
Analyst for test or analysis under sub -section (4) of section 23 of the Act shall 
be sent by registered post or by hand in a sealed packet, enclosed together with 
a memorandum in F orm 18, in an outer cover addressed to the Government 
Analyst. 
(2) A copy of the memorandum and a specimen impression of the seal used 
to seal the packet shall be sent to the Government Analyst separately by 
registered post or by hand. 
129[58. Confiscation of drugs, implements, machinery, etc. —(1) Where 
any person has been convicted for contravening any of the provisions of 
Chapter IV of the Act or any rule made thereunder, the stock of the drug in 
respect of which the contravention has been made shall be liable to confiscation. 
(2) Where any person has been convicted for the manufacture, of any drug 
deemed to be misbranded under clause (a), clause (b), clause (c), clause (d), 
clause (f) or clause (g) of section 17 of the Act, or a dulterated drug under 
section 17B of the Act, or for manufacture for sale, or stocking or exhibiting for 
sale or distribution of any drug without a valid licence as required under clause 
(c) of section 18 of the Act, any implements or machinery used in suc h 
manufacture, sale or distribution and any receptacle, packages, or coverings in 
which such drug is contained and the animals, vehicles, vessels or other 
conveyances used in carrying such drug shall also be liable to confiscation.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
130[58A.Procedure for disposal of confiscated drugs. —(1) The Court shall 
refer the confiscated drugs to the Inspector concerned for report as to whether 
they are of standard quality or contravene the provisions of the Act or the 
rulesin any respect. 
(2) If the Inspector, on the basis of Government Analyst's report finds the 
confiscated drugs to be not of standard quality or to contravene any of the 
provisions of the Act or the rules made thereunder, he shall report to the Court 
accordingly. The Court shall thereupon order the destruction of the drugs. The 
destruction shall take place under the supervision of the Inspector in the 
presence of such authority, if any, as may be specified by the Court. 
(3) If the Inspector finds that the confiscated dru gs are of standard quality 
and do not contravene the provisions of the Act or the rules made thereunder, he 
shall report to the Court accordingly. 131[The Court may then order the Inspector 
to give the stocks of confiscated drugs to hospital or dispensary maintained or 
supported by the Government or by Charitable Institutions.]] 
PART VI 
SALE OF DRUGS OTHER THAN HOMEOPATHIC MEDICINES 
59. (1) The State Government shall appoint licensing authorities for the 
purpose of this Part for such areas as may be specified. 
132[(2) Application for the grant 133[***] of a licence 134[to sell, stock, exhibit 
or offer for sale or distribute] drugs, other than those inc luded in Schedule X, 
135[shall be made in Form 19 accompanied by a fee of rupees one thousand and 
five hundred or in Form 19A accompanied by a fee of rupees five hundred, as 
the case may be, or in the case of drugs included in Schedule X shall be made in 
Form 19C accompanied by a fee of rupees five hundred, to the licensing 
authority:] 
Provided that in the case of an itinerant vendor or an applicant who desires to 
establish a shop in a village or town having population of 5,000 or less, the 
application in Form 19A shall be accompanied by a fee of rupees ten. 
(3) 135[A fee of rupees one hundred and fifty] shall be paid for a duplicate 
copy of a licence 134[to sell, stock, exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] drugs, 
other than those included in Schedule X, or for a licence to sell, stock, exhibit 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
for sale or distribute drugs included in Schedule X, if the original is defaced, 
damaged or lost: 
Provided that in the case of itiner ant vendor or an applicant who desires to 
establish a shop in a village or town having a population of 5,000 or less, the fee 
for a duplicate copy of a licence if the original is defaced, damaged or lost, shall 
be rupees two. 
136[***] 
137[60. A licensing authority may with the approval of the State Government 
by an order in writing delegate the power to sign licences and such other powers 
as may be specified in the order to any other person under his control.] 
138[61.Forms of licences to sell drugs. —(1) A licence 139[to sell, stock, 
exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] drugs other than those specified in 
Schedules C, C (1) and X and by retail on re stricted licence or by wholesale, 
shall be issued in Form 20, Form 20A or Form 20B, as the case may be: 
Provided that a licence in Form 20A shall be valid for only such drugs as are 
specified in the licence. 
(2) A licence 139[to sell, stock, exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] drugs 
specified in Schedules C and C (1) excluding those specified in Schedule X, by 
retail on restricted licence or by wholesale shall be issued in Form 21, Form 
21A or Form 21B, as the case may be: 
140[Provided that a licence in Form 21A shall not be granted for drugs 
specified in Schedule C and shall be valid for only such Schedule C (i) drugs as 
are specified in the licence.] 
(3) A licence 139[to sell, stock, exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] drugs 
specified in Schedule X by retail or by wholesale shall be issued in Form 20F or 
Form 20G as the case may be] 
62. Sale at more than one place. —If drugs are sold or stocked for sale at 
more than one place, separate application shall be made, and a separate licence 
shall be issued, in respect of each such place: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
141[Provided that this shall not apply to itinerant vendors who have no 
specified place of business and who will be licensed to conduct business in a 
particular area within the jurisdiction of the licensing authority.] 
142[62A. Restricted licences in Forms 20A and 21A —(a) Restricted 
licences in Forms 20A and 21A shall be issued subjec t to the discretion of the 
licensing authority to dealers or persons in respect of drugs whose sale does not 
require the supervision of a qualified person. 
(b) Licences to itinerant vendors shall be issued only in exceptional 
circumstances for bona fide travelling agents of firms dealing in drugs or for a 
vendor who purchases drugs from a licensed dealer for distribution in sparsely 
populated rural areas where other channels of distribution of drugs are not 
available. 
(c) The licensing authority may issue a licence in Form 21A to a travelling 
agent of a firm but to no other class of itinerant vendors for the specific purpose 
of distribution to medical practitioners or dealers samples of biological and 
other special products specified in Schedule C: 
Provided that travelling agents of licensed manufacturers, agents of such 
manufacturers and of importers of drugs shall be exempted from taking out 
licence for the free distribution of samples of medicines among members of the 
medical profession, hospitals, d ispensaries and the medical institutions or 
research institutions. 
143[62B. Conditions to be satisfied before a licence in Form 20A or Form 
21A is granted.—(1) A licence in Form 20A or Form 21A shall not be granted 
to any person unless the authority empowered to grant the licence is satisfied 
that the premises in respect of which the licence is to be granted are adequate 
and equipped with proper storage accommodation for preserving the properties 
of drugs to which the licence applies: 
Provided that this condition shall not apply in the case of licence granted to 
itinerant vendors. 
(2) In granting a licence under rule 62A the authority empowered to grant 
to it shall have regard to— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(i) the number of licences granted in the loc ality during one year 
immediately preceding; and 
(ii) the occupation, trade or business carried on by such applicant: 
Provided that the licensing authority may refuse to grant 144[***] a licence 
toany applicant or licensee in respect of whom it is satisfied that by reason of 
his conviction of an offence under the Act or these rules or the previous 
cancellation or suspension of any licence granted thereunder, he is not a fit 
person to whom a licence should be granted under this rule. 
(3) Any person who is aggrieved by the order passed by the licensing 
authority in sub-rule (1) may, within 30 days from the date of the receipt of such 
order appeal to the State Government and the State Government may, after such 
enquiry into the matter as it considers necessary and after giving the appellant 
an opportunity for representing his views in the matter, make such order in 
relation thereto as it thinks fit.] 
145[62C. Application for licence to sell drugs by wholesale or to distribute 
the same from a motor vehicle. —(1) Application for the grant 146[***] of a 
licence to sell by wholesale or to distribute from a motor vehicle shall be made 
to the licensing authority in Form 19AA and shal l be accompanied by 147[a fee 
of rupees five hundred]: 
148[***] 
(2) A fee of rupees 149[one hundred and fifty] shall be paid for a duplicate 
copy of a licence issued under thi s rule, if the original is defaced, damaged or 
lost. 
62D. Form of licences to sell drugs by wholesale or distribute drugs 
from a motor vehicle. —A licence shall be issued for sale by wholesale or for 
distribution from a motor vehicle of drugs other than tho se specified in 
Schedule C and Schedule C (1) in Form 20BB and of drugs specified in 
Schedule C and Schedule C (1) in Form 21BB: 
Provided that such a licence shall not be required in a case where a public 
carrier or a hired vehicle is used for transportation or distribution of drugs.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
150[63. Duration of licence. —(1) A licence issued in Forms 20, 20A, 20B, 
20BB, 20F, 20G, 21, 21A, 21B or Form 21BB shall remain valid, if licencee 
deposits a licence retention fee referred to in sub -rule (2) before the expiry of a 
period of every succeeding five years from the date of its issue, unless, it is 
suspended or cancelled by the licensing authority. 
(2) The licence retention fee referred to in sub -rule (1) shall be equivalent 
to the respective fee required for the grant of such licence. 
(3) If the licencee fails to pay licence retention fee on or before the due 
date as referred to in sub -rule (1), he shall be liable to pay licence retention fee 
along with a late fee calculated at the ra te of two per cent, of the licence fee for 
every month or part thereof up to six months, and in the event of non -payment 
of such fee, the licence shall be deemed to have been cancelled.] 
63A. 151[***] 
63B. 152[***] 
153[64. Conditions to be satisfied before a licence in 154[Form 20, 20B, 
20F, 20G, 21 or 21B] is granted 155[***] —(i) A licence in 154[Form 20, 20B, 
20F, 20G, 21 or 21B] 156[to sell, stock, exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] 
drugs shall not be granted 155[***] to any person unless the authority 
empowered to grant the licence is satisfied that the premises in respect of which 
the licence is to be granted 155[***] are adequate, equipped with proper storage 
accommodation for preserving the properties of the drugs to which the licence 
applies and are in cha rge of a person competent in the opinion of the licensing 
authority to supervise and control the sale, distribution and preservation of 
drugs: 
Provided that in the case of a pharmacy a licence in Form 20 or 21 shall not 
be granted 155[***] unless the licensing authority is satisfied that the 
requirements prescribed for a pharmacy in Schedule N have been complied 
with: 
157[Provided further that licence in Form 20F shall be granted 155[***] only 
to a pharmacy and in areas where a pharmacy is not operating, such licence may 
be granted 155[***] to a chemist and druggist.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this rule the term 'pharmacy' shall be held 
to mean a nd include every store or shop or other place —(1) where drugs are 
dispensed, that is, measured or weighed or made up and supplied; or (2) where 
prescriptions are compounded; or (3) where drugs are prepared; or (4) which 
has upon it or displayed within it, or affixed to or used in connection with it, a 
sign bearing the word or words "Pharmacy", "Pharmacist", "Dispensing 
Chemist", or "Pharmaceutical Chemist", or (5) which, by sign, symbol or 
indication within or upon it gives the impression that the operation s mentioned 
at (1), (2) and(3) are carried out in the premises; or (6) which is advertised in 
terms referred to in (4) above. 
(2) In granting 158[***] a licence under sub-rule (1) the authority empowered 
to grant it shall have regard— 
159[(i) to the average number of licences granted 155[***] during the 
period of 3 years immediately preceding, and] 
(ii) to the occupation, trade or business ordinarily carried on by such 
applicant during the period aforesaid: 
Provided that the licensing authority may refuse to grant if 160[***] a licence 
to any applicant or licensee in respect of whom it is satisfied that by reason of 
his conviction of an offence under t he Act or these rules, or the previous 
cancellation or suspension of any licence granted 161[***] thereunder, he is not a 
fit person to whom a licence should be granted 161[***] under this rule. Every 
such order shall be communicated to the licensee as soon as possible: 
162[Provided further that in respect of an application for the grant of a licence 
in Form 20B or Form 21B or both, the licensing authority shall satisfy himself 
that the premises in respect of which a wholesale licence is to be granted 
161[***] are— 
(i) of an area of not less than ten square metres; and 
163[(ii) in the charge of a competent person, who— 
(a) is a Registered Pharmacist, or; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) has passed the matriculation examination or its 
equivalentexamination from a recognised Board with the four 
years'experience in dealing with sale of drugs, or; 
(c) holds a degree of a recognised Unive rsity with one year's 
experience in dealing with drugs:] 
164[Provided also that— 
(i) in respect of an application for the grant of a licence in Form 20 
orForm 21 or both, the licensing authority shall satisfy itself that 
thepremises are on an area of not less than 10 square metres, and 
(ii) in respect of an application for the grant of a licence— 
(a) in Form 20 or Form 21 or both, and 
(b) in Form 20B or Form 21B or both, 
the licensing authority shall satisfy itself that the premises are of an area not less 
than 15 square metres: 
Provided also that the provisions of the preceding proviso shall not apply to 
the premises for which licences have been issued by the licensing authority 
before the commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (1st Amendment) Rules, 
1997.] 
165[(3) Any person who is aggrieved by the order passed by the licensing 
authority in sub-rule (1) may, within 30 days from the date of the receipt ofsuch 
order, appeal to the State Government and the State Government may, after 
such enquiry into the matter as it considers necessary and after giving the 
appellant an opportunity for representing his views in the matter, make such 
order in relation thereto as it thinks fit.] 
65. Condition of licences.—Licences in 166[Forms 20, 20A, 20B, 20F, 20G, 
21 and 21B] shall be subject to the conditions stated therein and to the following 
general conditions:— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
166[(1) Any drug shall, if compounded or made on the licensee's premises, 
be compounded or made by or under the direction and personal 
supervision of a 167[registered pharmacist], 
(2) The supply, otherwise than by way of wholesale dealing 168[***] of 
any drug supplied on the prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner 
shall be effected only by or under the personal supervision of a 
167[registered pharmacist]. 
169[(3) (1) The suppl y of any drug 166[other than those specified in 
Schedule X] on a prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner shall 
be recorded at the time of supply in a prescription register specially 
maintained for the purpose and the se rial number of entry in the register 
shall be e ntered on the prescription. The following particulars shall be 
entered in the register:— 
(a) serial number of the entry, 
(b) the date of supply, 
(c) the name and address of the prescribes 
170[(d) the name and address of the patient, or the name and address of 
the owner of the animal if the drug supplied is for veterinary use,] 
(e) the name of the drug or preparation and the quantity or in the case 
of a medicine made up by the licensee, the ingredients and quantities 
thereof, 
(f) in the case of a drug specified in 166[Schedule C or 171[Schedule H 
and Schedule H 1]] the name of manufacturer of the drug, its batch 
number and the date of expiry of potency, if any, 
(g) the signature of the 167[Registered Pharmacist] by or under whose 
supervision the medicine was made up or supplied: 
 Provided that in the case of drugs which are not compounded in the 
premises and which are supplied from or in the original containers the 
particulars specified in items (a) to (g) above may be entered in a case 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
or credit memo books, serially numbered and specially maintained for 
this purpose: 
 Provided further that i f the medicine is supplied on a prescription 
on which the medicine has been supplied on previous occasion and 
entries made in the prescription register it shall be sufficient if the new 
entry in the register includes a serial number, the date of supply, th e 
quantity supplied and asufficient reference to an entry in the register 
recording the dispensing of the medicine on the previous occasion: 
 Provided further that it shall not be necessary to record the above 
details in the register or in the cash or cred it memo particulars in 
respect of— 
(i) any drugs supplied against prescription under the Employees 
State Insurance Scheme if all the above particulars are given in 
that prescription, and 
(ii) any drugs other than that specified in 172[Schedule C or 
173[Schedule H and Schedule H 1]] if it is supplied in the original 
unopened container of the manufacturer and if the prescription is 
duly stamped at the time of supply with the name of the supplier 
and the date on which the supply was made and on condition that 
the provisions of sub-rule (4) (3) of this rule are complied with. 
174[(h) the supply of a drug specified in Schedule HI shall be recorded in 
a separate register at the t ime of the supply giving the name and address 
of the prescriber, the name of the patient, the name of the drug and the 
quantity supplied and such records shall be maintained for three years 
and be open for inspection.] 
(2) The option to maintain a prescrip tion register or a cash or credi memo book 
in respect of drugs and medicines which are supplied from or in the original 
container, shall be made in writing to the Licensing Authority at the time of 
application for the grant 175[***] of the licence to sell by retail: 
Provided that the Licensing Authority may require records to be maintained 
only in prescription register if it is satisfied that the entries in the carbon copy of 
the cash or credit memo book are not legible.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
176[(4) (1) The supply by retail, otherwise than on a prescription of a drug 
specified in Schedule C 177[***] shall be recorded at the time of supply either— 
(i) in a register specially maintained for the purpo se in which the following 
particulars shall be entered:— 
(a) serial number of the entry, 
(b) the date of supply, 
(c) the name and address of the purchaser, 
(d) the name of the drug and the quantity thereof, 
(e) in the case of a drug specifie d in Schedule C, the name of the 
manufacturer, the batch number and the date of expiry of potency, 
(f) the signature of the person under whose supervision the sale was 
effected, or 

(ii) in a cash or credit memo book, serially numbered containing all th e 
particulars specified in items (b) to (f) of sub-clause(i) above. 
Note.—The entries in the carbon copy of the cash or credit memo which is 
retained by the licensee shall be maintained in a legible manner. 
(2) The option to maintain a register or cash or credit memo book shall be made 
in writing to the Licensing Authority at the time of application for the grant 
178[***] of a licence to sell by retail: 
Provided that the Licensing Authority may require records to be maintained 
in a register if it is satisfied that the entries in the carbon copy of the cash or 
credit memo book are not legible. 
(3) (i) The supply by retail of an y drug shall be made against a cash or credit 
memo which shall contain the following particulars: — 
(a) name, address and sale licence number of the dealer, 
179[(b) serial number of the cash or credit memo,] 
180[(c)] the name and quantity of the drug supplied. 
(ii) Carbon copies of cash or credit memos shall be maintained by the licensee 
as record. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
181[(4) (i) Records of purchase of a drug intended for sale or sold by retail shall 
be maintained by the licensee and such records shall show the following 
particulars, namely:— 
(a) the date of purchase, 
(b) the name and address of the person from whom purchased and the 
number of the relevant licence held by him, 
(c) the name of the drug, the quantity and the batch number, and 
(d) the name of the manufacturer of the drug. 
(ii) Purchase bills including cash or credit memos shall be serially numbered by 
the licensee and maintained by him in a chronological order.]] 
182[(5) (1) Subject to the other provisions of these rules the supply of a drug by 
wholesale shall be made against a cash or credit memo bearing the name and 
address of the licensee and his licence number under the Drugs and Cosmetics 
Act in which the following particulars shall be entered:— 
(a) the date of sale, 
(b) the name, addre ss of the licensee to whom sold and his sale licence 
number. In case of sale to an authority purchasing on behalf of Government, or 
to a hospital, medical, educational or research institution or to a Registered 
Medical Practitioner for the purpose of suppl y to his patients the name arid 
address of the authority, institution or the Registered Medical Practitioner, as 
the case may be, 
(c) the name of the drug, the quantity and the batch number, 
(d) the name of the manufacturer, 
183[(e) the signature of the competent person under whose supervision the 
sale was effected.] 
(2) Carbon copies of cash or credit memos specified in clause (1) shall be 
preserved as records for a period of three years from the date of the sale of the 
drug. 
184[(3) (i) Records of purchase of a drug intended for resale or sold by wholesale 
shall be maintained by the licensee and such records shall show the following 
particulars, namely— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) the date of purchase, 
(b) the name, address and the number of relevant licence held by the person 
from whom purchased, 
(c) the name of the drug, the quantity and the batch number, and 
(d) the name of the manufacturer of the drug. 
(ii) Purchase bills including cash or credit memos sha ll be serially numbered by 
the licensee and maintained by him in a chronological order.]] 
(6) The licensee shall produce for inspection by an Inspector appointed under 
the Act on demand all registers and records maintained under these rules, and 
shall supply to the Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose 
of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and rules thereunder have been 
observed. 
(7) Except where otherwise provided in these rules, all registers and records 
maintained under these rules shall be preserved for a period of not less than two 
years from the date of the last entry therein. 
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule it shall not be necessary to 
record any particulars in a register specially mainta ined for the purpose if the 
particulars are recorded in any other register specially maintained under any 
other law for the time being in force. 
185[(9) (a) Substances specified in 186[Schedule H and Schedule H1] or Schedule 
X shall not be sold by retail except on and in accordance with the 
prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner and in the case of 
substances specified in Schedule X, the prescriptions shall be in duplicate, 
one copy of which sh all be retained by the licensee for a period of two 
years. 
(b) The supply of drugs specified in 186[Schedule H and Schedule HI] or 
Schedule X to Registered Medical Practitioners, Hospitals, Dispensaries 
and Nursing Homes shall be made only against the signed order in writing 
which shall be preserved by the licensee for a period of two years.] 
(10) For the purposes of clause (9) a prescription shall— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) be in writing and be signed by the person giving it with his usual 
signature and be dated by him; 
187[(b) specify the name and address of the person for whose treatment it is 
given, or the name and address of the owner of the animal if the drug is 
meant for veterinary use;] 
(c) indicate the total amount of the medicine to the supplied and the dose 
to be taken. 
(11) The person dispensing a prescription containing a drug specified in 
186[Schedule H and Schedule H1 ] 188[and Schedule X] shall com ply with the 
following requirements in addition to other requirements of these rules:— 
(a) the prescription must not be dispensed more than once unless the 
prescriber has stated thereon that it may be dispensed more than once; 
(b) if the prescription contains a direction that it may be dispensed a 
stated number of times or at stated intervals it must riot be dispensed 
otherwise than in accordance with the directions; 
(c) at the time of dispensing there must be noted on the prescription 
above the signature of the prescriber the name and address of the seller and 
the date on which the prescription is dispensed. 
189[(11A) No person dispensing a prescription containing substances specified in 
185[186[Schedule H and Schedule HI] or X] may supply any other preparation, 
whether containing the same substances or not in lieu thereof.] 
185[(12) Substances specified in Schedule X kept in retail shop or pr emises used 
in connection therewith shall be stored— 
(a) under lock and key in cupboard or drawer reserved solely for the 
storage of these substances; or 
(b) in a part of the premises separated from the remainder of the premises 
and to which only responsible persons have access.] 
190[***] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
191[(15) (a) The description "Drugstore" shall be displayed by such licensees 
who do not require the services of a 192[Registered Pharmacist]. 
(b) The description "Chemists and Druggists" shall be displayed by such 
licensees who employ the services of a 192[Registered Pharmacist] but who 
do not maintain a "Pharmacy" for compounding against prescriptions. 
(c) The description "Pharmacy", "Pharmacist", "Dispensing Chemist" or 
"Pharmaceutical Chemist" shall be displayed by such licensees who 
employ the services of a 192[Registered Pharmacist] and maintain a 
"Pharmacy" for compounding against prescriptions. 
192[Explanation.—For the purpose of this rule— 
(i) 'Registered Pharmacist' means a person who is a registered pharmacist as 
defined in clause (i) of section 2 of the Pharmacy Act, 1948 (8 of 1948): 
Provided that the provisions of sub -section (i) shall not apply to those 
persons who are already approved as "qualified person" by the Licensing 
authority on or before the 31st December, 1969. 
(ii) "Date of Expiry of Potency" means the date that is recorded on the 
container label or wrapper as the date upto which the substance may be 
expected to retain a potency nor less than or not to acquire a toxicity greater 
than that required or permitted by the prescribed test.]] 
193[(16) The licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an 
Inspector to record his impressions and the defects noticed.] 
194[(17) No drug shall be sold or stocked by the licensee after the date of 
expiration of potency recorded on its container, label or wrapper, or in violation 
of any statement or direction recorded on such container, label or wrapper: 
Provided that any such drugs in respect of which the licensee has taken 
steps with the manufacturer or his representative for the withdrawal, 
reimbursement or disposal of the same, may be stocked after the dat e of 
expiration of potency pend ing such withdrawal, reimbursement or disposal, as 
the case may be, subject to the condition that the same shall be stored separately 
from the tradestocks 195[and all such drugs shall be kept in packages or cartons, 
the top of which shall display prominently, the words "Not for sale"].] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
196[(18) No drug intended for distribution to the medica l profession as free 
sample which bears a label on the container as specified in clause 197[(ix)] of 
sub-rule (1) of rule 96, and no drug meant for consumption by the Employees' 
State Insurance Corporation, the Central Government Health Scheme, the 
Government Medical Stores Depots, the Armed Forces Medical Stores or other 
Government institutions, which bears a distinguishing mark or any inscription 
on the drug or on the label affixed to the container thereof indicating this 
purpose shall be sold or stocked by the licensee on his premises:] 
198[Provided that this sub-rule shall not be applicable to licensees who have been 
appointed as approved chemists, by the State Government in writing, under the 
Employee's State Insurance Scheme, or have been appointed as authorised agent 
or distributor, by the manufacturer in writing, for drugs meant for consumption 
under the Central Government Health Scheme, the Government Medical Stores 
Depots, the Armed Forces Medica l Stores or other Government Institutions for 
drugs meant for consumption under those schemes 199[or have been appointed as 
authorised Depots or Carrying and Forwarding agent by the manufacturer in 
writing, for storing free sampl es meant for distribution to medical profession] 
subject to the conditions that the stock shall be stored separately from the trade 
stocks and shall maintain separate records of the stocks received and distributed 
by them.] 
200[(19) The supply by retail of any drug in a container other than the one in 
which the manufacturer has marketed the drug, shall be made only by dealers 
who employ the services of a 201[Registered Pharmacist] and such supply shall 
be made under the direct supervision of the 201[Registered Pharmacist] in an 
envelope or other suitable wrapper or container showing the following 
particulars on the label:— 
(a) name of the drug, 
(b) the quantity supplied, 
(c) the name and address of the dealer.] 
202 [(20) The medicines for treatment of animals kept in a retail shop or premises 
shall be labelled with the words "Not for human use —for treatment of animals 
only" and shall be stored— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) in a cupboard or drawer reserved solely for the storage of veterinary drug, 
or 
(b) in a part of the premises separated from the remainder of t he premises to 
which customers are not permitted to have access.] 
203[(21) (a) The supply of drugs specified in Schedule X shall be recorded at the 
time of supply in a register (bound and serially page numbered specially 
maintained for the purpose and separate pages shall be allotted for each drug. 
(b) The following particulars shall be entered in the said register, namely:— 
(i) Date of transaction; 
(ii) Quantity received, if any, the name and address of the supplier and 
the number of the relevant licence held by thesupplier; 
(iii) Name of the drug; 
(iv) Quantity supplied; 
(v) Manufacturer's name; 
(vi) Batch No. or Lot No.; 
(vii) Name and address of the patient/purchaser; 
(viii) Reference Number of the prescription against which supplies were 
made; 
(ix) Bill No. and date in respect of purchases and supplies made by him; 
(x) Signature of the person under whose supervision the drugs have 
been supplied.] 

204[65A.Additional information to be furnished by an applicant for 
licence or a licensee to the licensing authority. —The applicant for the grant 
of a licence or any person granted a licence under this Part shall, on demand, 
furnish to the licensing authority, before the grant of the licence or during the 
period the licence is in force, as the case may be, documentary evidence in 
respect of the ownership or occupation on rental or other basis of the premises, 
specified in the application for licence or in the licence granted, constitution of 
the firm, or any other relevant matter which may be required for the purpose of 
verifying the correctness of the statements made by the applicant or the licensee 
which applying for or after obtaining the licence, as the case may be.] 
205[65B. Inspection for verification of compliance. —The licensing 
authority shall caus e inspection, by the Inspector appointed under the Act, of 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
each premises licensed under this Part, to verify the compliance with the 
conditions of licence and the provisions of the Act and these rules, not less than 
once in three years or as needed as per risk based approach.] 
66. Cancellation and suspension of licences. —(1) The licensing authority 
may, after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause why such an order 
should not be passed by an order in writing stating the reasons therefore, cancel 
a licence issued under this Part or suspend it for such period as he thinks fit, 
either wholly or in respect of some of the substances to which it relates, if in his 
opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the conditions of the 
licence or with any provisions of the Act or rules thereunder: 
209[Provided that, where such failure or contravention is the consequence of 
an Act or omission on the part of an agent or employee, the licence shall not be 
cancelled or suspended if the licensee proves to the satisfaction of the licensing 
authority— 
(a) that the act or omission was not instigated or connived at by him or, if 
the licensee is a firm or company, by a partner of the firm or a director of 
the company, or 
(b) that he or his agent or employee had not been guilty of any similar act 
or omission within twelve months before the date on which the act or 
omission in question took place, or where his agent or employee had been 
guilty of any such act or omission, the licen see had not or could not 
reasonably have had, knowledge of that previous act or omission, or 
(c) if the act or omission was a continuing act or omission, he had not or 
could not reasonably have had knowledge of that previous act or omission, 
or 
(d) that he had used due diligence to ensure that the conditions of the 
licence or the provisions of the Act or the rules thereunder were observed.] 
210[(2) A licensee whose licence has been suspended or cancelled may, 
within three mo nths of the date of order under sub -rule (1), prefer an appeal 
against that order to the State Government, which shall decide the same.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
211[66A. Procedure for disposal of drugs in the event of cancellation 
oflicence. — (1) In case a licensee, whose license has been cancelled, desires to 
dispose of the drugs he has in his possession in the premises in respect of which 
tine licence has been cancelled, he shall apply in writing to the licensing 
authority for this purpose, giving the following particulars, namely: — 
(a) the name and address of the person to whom the drugs are proposed to 
be sold or supplied together with the number of the licence for sale or 
manufacture, as the case may be, held by him, 
(b) the names of drugs to gether with their quantities, batch numbers, the 
names and addresses of their manufacturers and the dates of their expiry, if 
any, proposed to be sold to the person mentioned in clause (a). 
(2) The licensing authority may, after examination of the particul ars referred 
to in sub -rule (1) and, if necessary, after inspection by an Inspector of the 
premises where the drugs are stocked, grant the necessary permission for their 
disposal.] 
212 [***] 
213[PART VIA 
SALE OF HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES 
67A. (1) The State Government shall appoint licensing authorities for the 
purpose of this Part for such areas as may be specified. 
(2) Application for the grant or renewal of a licence 214[to sell, stock, exhibit 
or offer for sale or distribute] Homoeopathic medicines shall be made in Form 
19B to the licensing authority and shall be accompanied by 215[a fee of rupees 
two hundred and fifty]: 
216[Provided that if the applicant applied for renewal of licence after its 
expiry but within six months of such expiry the fee payable for renewal of such 
licence shall be 4[rupees two hundred and fifty plus an additional fee at the rate 
of rupees fifty per month or part thereof].] 
217[(3) If the original licence is either defaced, damaged or lost, a duplicate 
copy thereof may be issued on payment of 218[a fee of rupees fifty].] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
67B. A licensing authority may, with the approval of the State Government, 
by an order in writing, delegate the power to sign licences and such other 
powers, as may be specified, to any other person under this control. 
67C.Form of licences to sell drugs.—(1) A licence 214[to sell, stock, exhibit 
or offer for sale or distribute] Homoeopathic medicines by retail or by 
wholesale shall be issued in Form 20C or Form 20D as the case may be: 
219[Provided that no licence shall be required for exhibiting the drugs for 
promotional activities in any fair.] 
67D. Sale at more than one place. —If drugs are sold or stocked for sale at 
more than one place, a separate application shall be made and a separate licence 
shall be obtained in respect of each place. 
67E.Duration of licences.—An original licence or a renewed licence unless 
it is sooner suspended or cancelled shall be 218[valid for a period of five years on 
and from the date on which] it is granted or renewed: 
216[Provided that if the application for renewal of a licence in force is made 
before its expiry or if the application is made within six months of its expiry, 
after payment of additional fee, the licence shall continue to be in force until 
orders are passed on the application and the licence shall be deemed to have 
expired if application for its renewal is not made within six months after its 
expiry] 
220[67EE. Certificate of renewal. —The certificate of renew al of a sale 
licence in Forms 20C and 20D shall be issued in Form 20E.] 
67F. Conditions to be satisfied before a licence in Form 20C or Form 
20D is granted. —(1) A licence in Form 20C or Form 20D 221[to sell, stock 
exhibit or offe r for sale or distribute] Homoeopathic medicines shall not be 
granted to any person unless the authority empowered to grant the licence is 
satisfied that the premises in respect of which the licence is to be granted are 
clean and in the case of a licence in form 20C the sale premises is in charge of a 
person who is or has been dealing in Homoeopathic medicines and 
222[who is having,— 
(a) degree in Homoeopathy from a recognised University; or 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) degree in Pharmacy from a recognised University; or 
(c) Bachelor's degree from a recognised University with one year 
experience of dealing in Homoeopathic medicines in the clinic of a 
registered Homoeopathic Medical Practitioner or with the holder of 
licence in Form 20C or Form 20D; or 
(d) diploma in Homeopathic Pharmacy; or 
(e) diploma in Homeopathy Medicine and Surgery:] 
223[Provided that the person already registered with the State Licensing 
Authority as competent person for the purposes of grant of license in Form 20C 
or Form 20D or both prior to the coming into force of the Drugs and Cosmetics 
(11th Amendment) Rules, 2017, shall continue to be considered as a competent 
person for the said purposes: 
Provided further that no registered Homeopathic medical practitioner who is 
practising Homeopathy in the premises where Homeopathic medicines are sold 
shall deal in Homeopathic medicines.] 
(2) Any person who is aggrieved by the order passed by the licensing 
authority under sub-rule (1) may within 30 day s from the date of the receipt of 
such order appeal to the State Government and the State Government may, after 
such enquiry into the matter as it considers necessary and after giving the 
appellant an opportunity for representing his case, make such order in relation 
thereto as it thinks fit. 
67G. Conditions of licence.—Licence in Form 20C or 20D shall be subject 
to the conditions stated therein and to the following further conditions, 
namely:— 
(1) The premises where the Homoeopathic medicines are stocked f or sale or 
sold are maintained in a clean condition. 
224[(2) In the case of licence in Form 20C the Homeopathic medicines shall be 
sold,— 
(i) under the supervision of a person having qualifications referred to in 
sub-rule (1) of rule 67F; and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(ii) in manufacturer's sealed packing only except dispensing of 
medicines in globules, water or milk sugar or as per prescription of a 
Homoeopathic Medical Practitioner.] 
(3) The licensee shall permit an Inspector to inspect the prem ises and 
furnish such information as he may require for ascertaining whether the 
provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder have been observed. 
(4) The licensee in Form 20D shall maintain records of purchase and sale of 
Homoeopathic medicines c ontaining alcohol together with names and 
addresses of parties to whom sold. 
225[(5) The licensee in Form 20C shall maintain records of purchase and sale 
of Homoeopathic medicines containing alcohol. No records of sale in respect 
of Homoeopathic potentised preparations in containers of 30 ml. or lower 
capacity and in respect of mother tinctures made up in quantities up to 60 ml. 
need be maintained.] 
226[(6) The licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an 
Inspector to record his impressions and the defects noticed.] 
227[67GG. Additional information to be furnished by an applicant for 
licence or a licensee to the licensing authority. —The applicant for the gr ant 
of a licence or any person granted a licence under this part shall, on demand 
furnish to the licensing authority, before the grant of the licence or during the 
period the licence is in force, as the case may be, documentary evidence in 
respect of the o wnership or occupation on rental or other basis of the premises 
specified in the application for licence or in the licence granted, constitution of 
the firm, or any other relevant matter which may be required for the purpose or 
verifying the correctness of the statements made by the applicant or the 
licensee, while applying for or after obtaining the licence, as the case may be.] 
67H. Cancellation and suspension of licences.—(1)The licensing authority 
may, after giving the licensee an opportuni ty to show ca use why such an 
ordershouldnot be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons therefore, 
 cancela licence issued under this Part or suspend it for such period as he 
thinks fit, if in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of th e 
conditions of the licence or with any provisions of the Act or rules made 
thereunder: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
228[Provided that, where such failure or contravention is the consequence of 
an act or omission on the part of an agent or employee, the lice nce shall not be 
cancelled or suspended if the licensee proves to the satisfaction of the licensing 
authority— 
(a) that the act or omission was not instigated or connived at by him or, if 
the licensee is a firm or company, by a partner of the firm or a director of the 
company, or 
(b) that he or his agent or employee had not been guilty of any similar act 
or omission within twelve months before the date on which the act or 
omission in question took place or where his agent or employee had been 
guilty o f any such act or omission the licensee had not or could not 
reasonably have had knowledge of that previous act or omission, or 
(c) if the act or omission was a continuing act or omission, that he had not 
or could not reasonably have had knowledge of th at previous act or 
omission, or 
(d) that he had used due diligence to ensure that the conditions of the 
licence or the provisions of the Act or the rules thereunder were observed.] 
229[(2) A licensee whose licence has been sus pended or cancelled may, 
within three months of the date of the order under sub -rule (1), prefer an appeal 
against that order to the State Government, which shall decide the same.]] 
PART VII 
230[MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION] 
OF DRUGS OTHER THAN HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES 
68. Manufacture on more than one set of premises. —If drugs are 
manufactured on more than one set of premises a separate application shall be 
made and a separate licence shall be issued in respec t of each such set of 
premises. 
231[68A. Grant 232[***] of Licences by the Central Licence Approving 
Authority. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, on and from 
the commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (9th Amendment) Rules, [vide 
G.S.R 923 (E), dated 14th December, 1992], a licence for the manufacture for 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
sale or distribution of drugs as specified from time to time by the Central 
Government by notification in the Official Gazette, for the purpose of this rule, 
shall be granted 233[***] by the Central Licence Approving Authority 
(appointedby the Central Government):] 
Provided that the application for the grant 234[***] of such licence shall b e 
made to the licensing authority. 
(2) On receipt of the application for grant 234[***] of a licence, the 
licensing authority shall— 
(i) verify the statement made in the application form; 
(ii) cause the manufacturing the testing establishment to be inspected in 
accordance with the provisions of rule 79; and 
235[***] 
(3) If the licensing authority is satisfied that the applicant is in a position to 
fulfil the requirements laid down as in these rules, he shall prepare a report to 
that effect and forward it alongwith the application 236[and the licence (in 
triplicate) to be granted 237[***], duly completed] to the Central Licence 
Approving Authority: 
Provided that if the licensing authority is of the opinion that the applicant is 
not in a position to fulfil the requirements laid down in these rules, he may, by 
order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to grant the licence as the 
case may be. 
(4) If on receipt of the application and the report of the licensing authority 
referred to in sub-rule (3) and after taking such measures including inspection of 
the premises by the Inspector, appointed by the Central Government under 
section 21 of the Act, with or without an expert in the concerned field if deemed 
necessary, the Central Licence Approving Authority, is satisfied that the 
applicant is in a position to fulfil the requirements laid down in these rules, he 
may grant 238[***] the licence, as the case may be: 
Provided that if the Central Licence Approving Authority is of the opinion 
that the applicant is not in a position to fulfil the requirements laid down in 
these rules, he may, notwithstanding the report of the licensing authority, by 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, reject the application for grant 
234[***] of licence as the case may be.] 
239[68B. Delegation of Powers by the Central Licenc e Approving 
Authority.—The Central Licence Approving Authority may with the approval 
of the Central Government, by notification delegate his powers of signing 
licences and any other power under the rules to any person under his control 
having same qualific ations as prescribed for controlling authority under rule 
50A for such areas and for such periods as may be specified.] 
240[69. Application for licence to manufacture drugs other than those 
specified in Schedules C and C (1) to t he Drugs and Cosmetics Rules. —
241[(1) Application for grant 242[***] of 243[licence to manufacture for sale or for 
distribution] of drugs, other than those specified in Schedu les C and C(l) shall 
be made to the licensing authority appointed by the State Government for the 
purpose of this Part (hereinafter in this Part referred to as the licensing 
authority) and shall be made— 
(a) in the case of repacking of drugs excluding t hose specified in 
Schedule X for sale or distribution in Form 24B; 
(b) in the case of manufacture of drugs included in Schedule X in Form 
24F; 
(c) in any other case, in Form 24. 
(2) 244[(a) Every application in Form 24B sha ll be made up to ten items for 
each category of drugs categorised in Schedule M and shall be accompanied by 
a licence fee of rupees five hundred plus and an inspection fee of rupees two 
hundred for every inspection 245[***]. 
(b) Every application in Form 24F shall be made up to ten items for each 
category of drugs categorised in Schedule M and shall be accompanied by a 
licence fee of rupees six thousand and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand 
and five hundred for every subsequent inspection 245[***]. 
(c) Every application in Form 24 shall be made upto ten it ems for each 
category of drugs 246[referred to in Schedule M relating to Pharmaceuticals 
products and Schedule M -III relating to medical devices and in-vitro 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
diagnostics] and shall be accompanied by a licence fee of rupees six thousand 
and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred for every 
inspection 245[***].] 
247[***] 
(4) A fee of 248[rupees one hundred shall be paid] for a duplicate copy of the 
licence issued under clause (a), clause (b) or clause (c) of sub -rule (1) if the 
original is defaced, damaged or lost. 
249[(5) Applications for manufacture of more than ten items of each category 
of drugs as 250[referred to in Schedule M relating to pharmaceuticals products 
and Schedule M -III relating to medical devices and in-vitro diagnostics] or for 
manufacture of additional items of drugs by licensees in Form 24 or Form 24F 
shall be accompanied by an additional fee at the rate of rupees three hundred for 
each additional item of drug. Applications in Form 24B for licence to 
manufacture for sale and distribution for repacking for more than 10 items of 
each category or for manufacture of additional item of drug shall be 
accompanied by additional fee of rupees one hundred for each additional item 
of drugs as categorized in Schedule M and M-III. ] 
251[(6) Where an application under this rule is for the manufacture of drug 
formulations falling under the purview of new drug as defined in rule 122E, 
such application shall also be accompanied with approval, in writing, in favour 
of the applicant, from the licensing authority as defined in clause (b) of rule 21.] 
252[69A. Loan licences. —1[(1) Application for the grant 253[***] of loan 
licences to manufactu re for sale or for distribution of drugs other than those 
specified in Schedule C, Schedule C(l) and Schedule X shall be made up to ten 
items for each category of drugs 250[referred to in Schedule M relating to 
pharmaceulicals products and Schedule M -III relating to medical devices and 
in-vitro diagnostics] and shall be made in Form 24A accompanied by a licence 
fee of rupees six thousand and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five 
hundred to the licensing authority: 
254[***] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
255[Explanation.—For the purpose of this rule a loan licence means a licence 
which a licensing authority may issue to an applicant who intends to avail the 
manufacturing facilities owned by a licensee in Form 25.] 
(2) The licensing authority shall, before the grant of a loan licence, satisfy 
himself that the manufacturing unit has adequate equipment, staff, capacity for 
manufacture, and facilities for testing, to undertake the manufacture on behalf 
of the applicant for a loan licence. 
256[(3) subject to the provisions of sub -rule (2), application for manufacture 
of more than ten items for each category of drug on a loan licence shall be 
accompanied by an additional fee of r upees three hundred per additional item 
257[referred to in Schedule M relating to pharmaceuticals products and Schedule 
M-III relating to "medical devices and in-vitro diagnostics].] 
258[(4) If the lice nsing authority is satisfied that a loan licence is defaced 
damaged or lost or otherwise rendered useless, he may, on payment of 259[a fee 
of rupees one thousand] issue a duplicate licence.]] 
260[***] 
261[70. Form of licence to repack or manufacture drugs other than those 
specified in Schedules C and C(l). —Licences for repacking of drugs against 
application in Form 24B shall be granted in Form 25B, licences for manufacture 
of d rugs included in Schedule X against application in Form 24F shall be 
granted in Form 25F and licences for manufacture of drugs against application 
in Form24 shall be granted in Form 25.] 
262[70A. Form of loan licence to manufactu re for sale 263[or for 
distribution] of drugs other than those 261[specified in Schedules C, C(l) and 
X].—A loan 263[licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution] of dr ugs 
other than those specified in 263[Schedules C, C(l) and X] shall be issued in 
Form 25A.] 
264[71. Conditions for the grant 265[***] of a licence in Form 25 261[or 
Form 25F.]—Before a licence in Form 25 261[or Form 25F] is granted 266[***] 
the following conditions shall be complied with by the applicant:— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(1) the manufacture shall be conducted un der the active direction and personal 
supervision of competent technical staff consisting at least of one person who is 
a whole time employee and who is— 
(a) a graduate in Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry of 267[a 
University established in India by law or has an equivalent qualification 
recognized and notified by the Central Government for such purpose] and 
has had at least eighteen months' practical experience after the graduation 
in the manufacture of drugs. This period o f experience may, however, be 
reduced by six months if the person has undergone training in manufacture 
of drugs for a period of six months during his University course; or 
(b) a graduate in Science of 267[a University established in India by law or 
has an equivalent qualification recognised and notified by the Central 
Government for such purpose] who for the purpose of his degree has 
studied Chemistry as a principal subject and has had at least three years' 
practical experience in the manufacture of drugs after his graduation; or 
(c) a graduate in Chemical Engineering or Chemical Technology or 
Medicine of 267[a University established in India by law or has an 
equivalent qualification recognised and notified by the Central Government 
for such purpose] with general training and practical experience, extending 
over a period of not less than three years in the manufacture of drugs, after 
his graduation; or 
268[(d) holding any foreign qualification the quality and content of training 
of which are comparable with those prescribed in clause(a), clause (b) or 
clause (c) and is permitted to work as competent technical staff under this 
rule by the Central Government:] 
Provided that any person who was immediately before the 29th June, 1957, 
actively directing and personally supervising the manufacture of drugs and 
whose name was accordingly entered in any licence granted in Form 25 269[or 
Form 25F] as it exi sted before that date shall be deemed to be qualified for the 
purposes of this rule: 
270[Provided further that for drugs other than those specified in Schedules C, 
C(l), and X and meant for veterinary use, the wholetime employee under whose 
supervision the manufacture is conducted shall be a graduate in Veterinary 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Science or Pharmacy or General Science or Medicine of a University 
recognized by the Central Government and who has had atleast three years' 
practical experience in the manufacture of drugs excluding graduate in 
Pharmacy who shall have at least eighteen months' practical experience in the 
manufacture of drugs:] 
271[Provided 272[also] that the licensing authority may, in the matter of 
manufacture of disinfectant fluid insecticides, liquid paraffin, medicinal gases, 
non-chemical contraceptives, plaster of paris and surgical dressings, for the 
manufacture of which the knowledge of Pharmaceutical Chemistry or Pharmacy 
is n ot essential, permit the manufacture of the substance under the active 
direction and personal supervision of the competent technical staff, who, 
although not having any of the qualifications included in clause (a), (b) or (c) of 
this rule, has, in the opin ion of the licensing authority, adequate experience in 
the manufacture of such substance.] 
(2) The factory premises shall comply with the conditions prescribed in 
Schedule M. 
(3) The applicant shall provide adequate space, plant and equipment for the 
manufacturing operations; the space, plant and equipment recommended for 
various operations are given in Schedule M. 
273[(4) The applicant shall provide and maintain adequate staff, premises and 
laboratory equipment for carrying out tests of the strength, quality and purity of 
the substances at the testing unit which shall be separate from the manufacturing 
unit and head of the testing unit shall be independent of the head of the 
manufacturing unit: 
Provided that the manufacturing u nits, which, before the commencement of 
the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Rules, 1977 274, were making 
arrangements with institutions approved by the licensing authority for such tests 
to be carried out on their behalf may conti nue such arrangements up to the 30th 
June, 1977: 
Provided further that for tests requiring sophisticated instrumentation 
techniques or biological or microbiological methods other than sterility the 
licensing authority may permit such tests to be conducted by institutions 
approved by it 275[under Part XV (A) of these rules] for this purpose.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
276[(4A) The head of the testing unit referred to in condition (4) shall possess a 
degree in Medicine or Science or Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry of a 
University recognised for this purpose and shall have experience in the testing 
of drugs, which in the opinion of the licensing authority is considered adequate.] 
(5) The applicant shall make adequate arrangemen ts for the storage of drugs 
manufactured by him.] 
277[(6) The applicant shall, while applying for a licence to manufacture 
278[drugs], furnish to the licensing authority evidence and date justifying that the 
278[drugs]— 
(i) contain the constituent ingredients in therapeutic/prophylactic 
quantities as determined in relation to the claims or conditions for which 
the medicines are recommended for use or claimed to be useful; 
(ii) are safe for use in the context of the vehicles, excipients additives and 
pharmaceutical aids used in the formulation and under the conditions in 
which the formulations for administration and use are recommended; 
(iii) are stable under the conditions of storage recommended; and 
(iv) contain such ingredients and in such quantities for which there is 
therapeutic justification.] 
279[(v) have the approval, in writing, in favour of the applicant to 
manufacture drug formulatio ns falling under the purview of new drug as 
defined in rule 122E, from the licensing authority as defined in clause (b) 
of rule 21.] 
280[(7) The licensee shall comply with the requirements of 'Good Manufacturing 
Practices' as laid down in Schedule M.]] 
281[(8) The applicant shall make application for grant of licence for a drug 
formulation containing single active ingredient only in proper name.] 
282[(9) In case the applicant intends to market the drug under a brand name or 
trade name, the applicant shall furnish an undertaking in Form 51 to the 
licensing authority to the effect that to the best of his knowledge based on 
search in trade marks registry, central data base for brand name or trade name of 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
drugs maintained by Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation, literature 
and reference books on details of drug formulations in India, and internet, such 
or similar brand name or trade name is not already in existence with respe ct to 
any drug in the country and the proposed brand name or trade name shall not 
lead to any confusion or deception in the market.] 
283[71A. Conditions for the grant 284[***] of a licence in Form 25B. —
Before a licence in Form 25B is granted 285[***] the following conditions shall 
be complied with by the applicant— 
(1) the repacking operation shall be carried out under hygienic conditions 
under the supervision of a competent person; 
286[(2) the factory premises shall comply with the conditions prescribed in 
Schedule M; and] 
287[(3) the applicant shall have adequate arrangements in his own premises 
for carrying out tests for t he strength, quality and purity of the drugs at a 
testing unit which shall be separate from the repacking unit; 
281[(4) The application for grant of licence for a drug formulation 
containing single active ingredient shall be made only in proper name:] 
282[(5) In case the applicant intends to market the drug under a brand nam e 
or trade name, the applicant shall furnish an undertaking in Form 51 to the 
licensing authority to the effect that to the best ofhis knowledge based on 
search in trade marks registry, central data base for brand name or trade 
name of drugs maintained by Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation, literature and reference books on details of drug 
formulations in India, and internet, such or similar brand name or trade 
name is not already in existence with respect to any drug in the country 
and the proposed brand name or trade name shall not lead to any confusion 
or deception in the market:] 
Provided that the repacking units, which, be fore the commencement of the 
Drugs and Cosmetics (Second Amendment) Rules, 1977 288, were making 
arrangement with institutions approved by the licensing authority for such tests 
to be carried out on their behalf, may continue such arrangement up to the 31st 
July, 1977: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Provided further that for tests requiring sophisticated instrumentation 
techniques or biological or microbiological methods the licensing authority may 
permit such test to be conducted by institutions approved by it 289[under Part 
XV(A) of these rules] for this purpose.] 
Explanation.—A person who satisfies the following minimum qualifications 
shall be deemed to be a "competent person" for the purposes of rule 71A or 74A 
of these rules, namely:— 
(a) a person who holds the Diploma in Pharmacy approved by the 
Pharmacy Council of India under the Pharmacy Act, 1948 (8 of 1948) or 
a person who is registered under the said Act, or 
(b) a person who has passed the Intermediate examination with 
Chemistry as one of the principal subjects or an examination equivalent 
to it or an examination recognised by the licensing authority as equivalent 
to it, or 
(c) a person who has passed the Matriculation examination or an 
examination recognised by the li censing authority as equivalent to it and 
has had not less than four years’ practical experience in the manufacture, 
dispensing or repacking of drugs.] 
290[71B. Conditions for the grant 291[***] of a li cence in Form 25A. —
Before a l icence in Form 25A is granted 292[***], the applicant shall, while 
applying for a licence to manufacture 293[drugs], furnish to the licensing 
authority evidence and date justifying that the 293[drugs]— 
(i) contain the constituent ingredients in therapeutic/prophylactic 
quantities as determined in relation to the claims or conditions for which the 
medicines are recommended for use or claimed to be useful; 
(ii) are safe for use in the context of the vehicles, excipients, additives and 
pharmaceutical aids used in the formulations and under conditions in which 
the formulations for administration and use are recommended; 
(iii) are stable under the conditions of storage recommended; and 
(iv) contain such ingredients and in such quantities for which there is 
therapeutic justification:] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
294[(v) in case the applicant intends to market the drug under a brand name 
or trade name, the applicant shall furnish an undertaking in Form 51 to the 
licensing authority to the effect that to the best of his knowledge based on 
search in trade marks registry, central data base for brand name or trade 
name of drugs maintained by Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation, 
literature and reference books on details of drug formulations in India, and 
internet, such or similar brand name or trade name is not already in 
existence with respect to any drug in the country and the proposed brand 
name or trade name shall not lead to any confusion or deception in the 
market:] 
295[Provided that the application for grant of a licence for a drug formulation 
containing single active ingredient shall be made only in proper name.] 
296[72.Duration of licence.—(1) A licence issued in Form 25, Form 25B and 
Form 25F shall remain valid if the licencee deposits a licence retention fee 
referred to in sub-rule (2) before the expiry of a period of every succeeding five 
years from the date of its issue, unless, it is suspended or cancelled by the 
licensing authority. 
(2) The licence retention fee referred to in sub -rule (1) shall be equivalent 
to the respective fee required for the grant of such licence excluding inspection 
fee paid for grant of licence. 
(3) If the licencee fails to pay licence retention fee on or before the due 
date as referred to in sub -rule (1), he shall be liable to pay licence retention fee 
along with a late fee calculated at the rate of t wo per cent, of the licence fee for 
every month or part thereof up to six months, and in the event of non -payment 
of such fee, the licence shall be deemed to have been cancelled.] 
73.297[***] 
73A.298[***] 
299[73AA.Duration of loan licence. —(1) A licence issued in Form 25A 
shall remain valid if licencee deposits a licence retention fee referred to in sub -
rule (2) before the expiry of a period of every succeeding five years from the 
date of its issue, unless, it is suspended or cancelled by the licensing authority. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(2) The licence retention fee referred to in sub -rule (1) shall be equivalent 
to the respective fee required for the grant of such licence excluding inspection 
fee paid for grant of licence. 
(3) If the licencee fails to pay licence retention fee on or before the due 
date as referred to in sub -rule (1), he shall be liable to pay licence retention fee 
along with a late fee calculated at the rate of two per cent, of t he licence fee for 
every month or part there of up to six months, and in the event of non -payment 
of such fee, the licence shall be deemed to have been cancelled.] 
300[73AB. Inspection for grant of licence and verification of 
compliance.— (1)Before a licence in Form 25 or Form 25A or Form 25B or 
Form 25F is granted, the licensing authority shall cause the establishment in 
which the manufacture of drugs is proposed to be conducted or being conducted 
to be inspected jointly by the D rugs Inspectors appointed by the Central 
Government and the State Government under this Act who shall examine the 
establishment intended to be used or being used for the manufacture of drugs. 
(2) The premises licensed under sub -rule (1) shall be inspected jointly by 
Inspector appointed by the Central Government and State Government to verify 
the compliance with the conditions of licence and the provisions of the Act and 
these rules not less than once in three years or as needed as per risk based 
approach.] 
73B. 301[***] 
302[74. Conditions of licence in 303[Form 25 and Form 25F].—A licence in 
303[Form25 and Form 25F] shall be subject to the conditions s tated therein and 
to the following further conditions, namely:— 
(a) the licensee shall provid e and maintain staff, premises and the 
equipment as specified in rule 71; 
(b) the licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act and of these 
rules and with such further requirements, if any, as may be specified in any 
rules subsequently made under Chapter IV of the Act, provided that where 
such further requirements are specified in the rules, these would come into 
force, four months after publication in the Official Gazette; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(c) the licensee shall either in his own laboratory or in any other 
laboratory approved by the licensing authority 304[under Part XV (A) of 
these rules] test each batch or lot of the raw material used by him for the 
manufacture of his products and also each batch of the finalproduct and 
shall maintain records or registers showing the particulars in respect of such 
tests as specified in Schedule U. The records or registers shall be retained 
for a period of five years from the date of manufacture; 
(d) the licensee shall keep records of the details of manufacture as per 
particulars given in Schedule U of each batch of the drugs manufactured by 
him and such records shall be retained for a period of five years; 
(e) the licensee shall allow an 305[Inspector appointed under the Act] to 
enter, with or without prior notice, any premises and to inspect the plant and 
the process of manufacture and the means employed in standardising an d 
testing the drugs; 
(f) the licensee shall allow an 305[Inspector appointed under the Act] to 
inspect all registers and records maintained under these rules and to take 
samples of the manufactured drugs and shall supply to su ch Inspector such 
information as he may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the 
provisions of the Act and the rules thereunder have been observed; 
(g) the licensee shall, from time to time, report to the licensing authority 
any changes in the expert staff responsible for the manufacture or testing of 
the drugs and any material alterations in the premises or plant used for the 
purpose which have been made since the date of the last inspection made on 
behalf of the licensing authority; 
306[(h) the licensee shall, on request, furnish to the licensing authority, the 
controlling authority or to such authorities as the licensing authority or the 
controlling authority may direct, from every batch or batches of drugs as the 
licensing authority or the controlling authority may from time to time 
specify, a sample of such quantity as may be considered adequate by such 
authority for any examination and, if so required, also furnish full protocols 
of tests which have been applied;] 
(i) if the licensing authority 307[or the controlling authority] so directs and if 
requested by the licensee who had also furnished prima facie reasons for 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
such directions, the licensee shall not sell or offer for sale any batc h in 
respect of which a sample is or protocols are furnished under clause (h) 
until a certificate authorising the sale of the batch has been issued to him by 
or on behalf of the licensing authority 307[or the controlling authority]; 
(j) the licensee shall on being informed by the licensing authority 307[or the 
controlling authority] that any part of any batch of the drug has been found 
by the licensing authority 307[or the cont rolling authority] not to conform 
with the standards of strength, quality or purity specified in these rules and 
on being directed so to do, withdraw the remainder of the batch from sale, 
and, so far as may in the particular circumstances of the case be practicable, 
recall all issues already made from that batch; 
(k) the licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an 
Inspector to record his impressions and the defects noticed; 
308[(1) the licensee shall maintai n reference samples from each batch of the 
drugs manufactured by him in a quantity which is at least twice the quantity 
of the drug required to conduct all the tests performed on the batch. In case 
of drugs bearing an expiry date on the label, the referenc e samples shall be 
maintained for a period of three months beyond the date of expiry of 
potency. In case of drugs where no date of expiry of potency is specified on 
the label, the reference samples shall be maintained for a period of three 
years from the date of manufacture;] 
309[(m) the licensee, who has been granted a licence in Form 25F, shall— 
(i) forward to the licensing authority of the concerned States of 
manufacture and supply of the drug a statement of the sales effected to 
the manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers, hospitals, dispensaries and 
nursing homes and Registered Medical Practitioners every three 
months; 
(ii) maintain accounts of all transactions giving details as indicated 
below in a register bound and seri ally page numbered and such 
records shall be retained for a period of five years or one year after the 
expiry of potency, whichever is later— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
A. Accounts of the drugs specified in Schedule X used for 
themanufacture— 
1. Date of issue 
2. Name of the drug. 
3. Opening balance of stock on the production day. 
4. Quantity received, if any, and source from where received. 
5. Quantity used in manufacture. 
6. Balance quantity on hand at the end of the production day. 
7. Signature of the person in charge. 
B. Accounts of production— 
1. Date of manufacture. 
2. Name of the drug. 
3. Batch Number. 
4. Quantity of raw material used in manufacture. 
5. Anticipated yield. 
6. Actual yield. 
7. Wastage. 
8. Quantity of the manufactured goods transferred. 
C. Accounts of the manufactured drugs— 
1. Date of manufacture. 
2. Name of the drug. 
3. Batch Number. 
4. Opening Balance. 
5. Quantity manufactured. 
6. Quantity sold. 
7. Name of the purchaser and his address. 
8. Balance quantity at the end of the day. 
9. Signature of the person in charge. 
(n) The licensee shall store drugs specified in Schedule X in bulk form and 
when any of such drug is required for manufacture in a place other than its 
place of storage it sh all be kept in a separate place under the direct custody 
of a responsible person.]] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
310[(o) The licensee shall comply, with the requirements of 311["Good 
Laboratory Practices" as laid down in Schedule L -I and] 1191["Good 
Manufacturing Practices and Requirements of Premises, Plant and 
Equipment for Pharmaceutical Products"] as laid down in Schedule M.] 
312[(p) No advertisement of the drugs specified i n Schedule H, Schedule HI 
and Schedule X shall be made except with the previous sanction of the 
Central Government.] 
313[(q) the applicant shall submit the result of bioequivalence study referred 
to in Schedule Y, along with the application for grant of a licence of oral 
dosage form of drugs specified under category II and category IV of the 
biopharmaceutical classification system.] 
314[74A.Conditions for licence in Form 25B. —A licence in Form 25B 
shall be subject to conditions stated therein and to the following conditions:— 
(a) the repacking of drugs shall at all times be conducted under the 
personal supervision of at least one person who is approved as a competent 
person by the licensing authority; 
(b) the licensee shall e ither provide and maintain adequate arrangements 
in his own premises for carrying out tests of the strength, quality and purity 
of the drugs repacked or make arrangements with some institution approved 
by the licensing authority 315[under Part XV (A) ofthese rules] for such tests 
to be regularly carried out on his behalf by the institution; 
(c) the licensee shall make adequate arrangements for the storage of drugs; 
316[(d) the licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act and of these 
rules and with such further requirements, if any, as may be specified in any 
rules subsequently made under Chapter IV of the Act: Provided that where 
such further requirements are specified in the rules, these would c ome into 
force four months after publication in the Official Gazette;] 
(e) the licensee shall allow any 317[Inspector appointed under the Act] to 
enter with or without notice, any premises where the packing of drugs in 
respect of which the licence is issued is carried on, to inspect the premises 
and to take samples of repacked drugs; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
318[(f) the licensee shall, either in his own laboratory or, in any other 
laboratory approved by the licensing authority, test each batch or lot of raw 
material used by him for repacking and also each batch of the product thus 
repacked and shall maintain records or registers showing the particulars in 
respect of such tests as specified in Schedule U. The records or register 
shall be retained for a period of five years from the date of repacking. The 
licensee shall allow the Inspector to inspect all registers and records 
maintained under these rules and shall supply to the Inspector such 
information as he may require for the pu rpose of ascertaining whether the 
provisions of the Act and these rules have been observed;] 
319[(g) the licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book, in Form 35, to enable 
an Inspector to record his impressions and the defects noticed;] 
320[(h) the licensee shall maintain reference samples from each batch of the 
drugs manufactured by him in a quantity which is at least twice the quantity 
of the drug required to conduct all the tests performed on the batch . In case 
of drugs bearing an expiry date on the label, the reference samples shall be 
maintained for a period of three months beyond the date of expiry of 
potency. In case of drugs where no date of expiry of potency is specified on 
the label, the referenc e samples shall be maintained for a period of three 
years from the date of manufacture.] 
321[(i) No advertisement of the drugs specified in Schedule H, Schedule HI 
or Schedule X shall be made except with the previous sanction of the 
Central Government.] 
322[74B. Conditions of licence in Form 25A. —(1) The licence in Form 
25A shall be deemed to be cancelled or suspended, if the licence owned by the 
licensee in Form 25 whose manufacturing facilities have be en availed of by the 
licensee is cancelled or suspended as the case may be, under these rules. 
(2) The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act and of these 
rules and with such further requirements if any, as may be specified in any rules 
subsequently made under Chapter IV of the Act; provided that where such 
further requirements are specified in the rules, these would come into force four 
months after publication in the Official Gazette. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(3) The licensee shall test each batch or lot of the raw material used by him 
for the manufacture of his products and also each batch of the final product and 
shall maintain records or registers showing the particulars in respect of such 
tests as specified in Schedule U. The records or registers shall be r etained for a 
period of five years from the date of manufacture. The licensee shall allow an 
Inspector to inspect all registers and records maintained under these rules and 
shall supply to the Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose 
of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and these rules have been 
observed. 
(4) The licensee shall either— 
(i) provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the licensing authority 
adequate staff and adequate laboratory facilities for carrying out tests of 
strength, quality and purity of the substances manufactured by him; or 
(ii) make arrangements with some institution approved by the 
licensing authority 323[under Part XV(A) of these rules] for such tests to 
be regularly carried out on his behalf by the institution.] 
324[(5) The licensee shall maintain reference samples from each batch of the 
drugs manufactured by him in a quantity which is at least twice the quantity of 
the drug required to conduct all the tests performed on the batch. In case of 
drugs bearing an expiry date on the label the reference samples shall be 
maintained for a period of three months beyond the date of expiry of potency. In 
case of drugs where no date of expiry of p otency is specified on the label, the 
reference samples shall be maintained for a period of three years from the date 
of manufacture.] 
325[(6) The licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable 
an Inspector to record his impressions and the defects noticed.] 
326[(7) No advertisement of the drugs specified in Schedule H, Schedule HI 
or Schedule X shall be made except with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government.] 
327[(8) the app licant shall submit the result of bioequivalence study referred 
to in Schedule Y, along with the application for grant of a licence of oral dosage 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
form of drugs specified under category II and category IV of the 
biopharmaceutical classification system.] 
328[75.Forms of application for licence to manufacture for sale or 
distribution of drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) 329[excluding those 
specified in Part XB and Schedule X].—(1) Applications for the grant 330[***] 
of licence to manufacture for sale or distribution of drugs specified in Schedules 
C and C(1) 329[excluding those specified in Part XB and Schedule X], shall b e 
made to the licensing authority in Form 27, and 331[shall be made upto ten items 
for each category of drugs 332[referred to in Schedule M relating to 
pharmaceuticals products and Schedule M -III relati ng to medical devices and 
in-vitro diagnostics] and shall be accompanied by a licence fee of rupees six 
thousand and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred for 
every inspection. 
333[***] 
334[***] 
(2) Application for grant 330[***] of licence to manufacture for sale or 
distribution of drugs specified in Schedules C, C(l) and X shall be made to the 
licensing authority in Form 27B, and 331[shall be made upto ten items for each 
category of drugs 332[referred to in Schedule M relating to pharmaceuticals 
products and Schedule M -III relating to medical devices and in-vitro 
diagnostics] and shall be accompanied by a licence fee of rupees six thousand 
and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred for every 
inspection 
333[***] 
Provided that the applicant shall possess a licence in Form 28 to manufacture 
such drugs: 
334[***] 
335[(3) The application for grant 330[***] of licenses to manufacture for sale 
or for distribution of drugs in 336[Large Volume Parenterals, Sera and Vaccine 
and Recombinant DNA (r -DNA) derived drugs,] shall be made to the licensing 
authority appointed under this Part in Form 27D and 337[shall be made upto ten 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
items for each category of drugs categorised in Schedule M and sha ll be 
accompanied by a licence fee of rupees six thousand and an inspection fee of 
rupees one thousand and five hundred for every inspection 338[***]]: 
339[***] 
1338[(3A) The application referred to in sub -rule (3) of rule 75 of these rules, 
and the application for grant of permission to manufacture new drug for sale or 
distribution under rule 80 of the New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019 or 
rule 122B of these rules, as the case may be, shall be made simultaneously.] 
340[(4) A fee of rupees one thousand shall be paid for duplicate copy of the 
licence issued under sub -rule (1), sub -rule (2) or sub rule (3), as the case may 
be, if the original licence is detected, damaged or lost. 
(5) If the licensee applies for manufacture of more than ten items of each 
category of drugs, the application shall be accompanied by an additional fee at 
the rate of rupees three hundred for each additional item of drugs 341[referred to 
in Schedule M relating to pharmaceuticals products and Schedule M -III relating 
to medical devices and in-vitro diagnostics].] 
 342[(6) Where an application under this rule is for the ma nufacture of drug 
formulations falling under the purview of new drug under rule 80 of the New 
Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019 or rule 122B, the licence to manufacture 
for sale or distribution of the drugs shall be granted after approval of the drug as 
new drug.] 
343[75A. Loan licences. —(1) Applications for the grant 344[***] of loan 
345[licences for the manufacture for sale or for distribution] of drugs specified in 
Schedules Cand C(l) 346[excluding those specified in Part XB and Schedule X] 
shall be made in Form 27 A to the licensing authority and 337[shall be made upto 
ten items foreach category of drugs 341[referred to in Schedule M relating to 
pharmaceuticals products and Schedule M -III relating to medical devices and 
in-vitro diagnostics]and shall be accompanied by a licence fee of rupees six 
thousand and aninspection fee of rupees one tho usand and five hundred for 
every inspection 
338[***]. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
347[***]. 
348[Explanation.—For the purpose of this rule a loan licence means a licence 
which a licensing authority may i ssue to an applicant who intends to avail the 
manufacturing facilities owned by a licensee in Form 28.] 
349[(1A) The application for grant 350[***] of loan licence to manufacture for 
sale or distributio n of drugs in 'Large Volume Parenterals', 'Sera and Vaccine' 
and 'Recombinant DNA (r -DNA) derived drugs' shall be made to the licensing 
authority appointed under this Part, in Form 27DA and be made upto ten items 
for each category of drugs categorized in S chedule M and accompanied by a 
licence fee of six thousand rupees and an inspection fee of one thousand five 
hundred rupees for every inspection 351[***]: 
352[***]. 
(2) The licensing authority, shall, b efore the grant of a loan licence, satisfy 
himself that the manufacturing unit has adequate equipment, staff, capacity for 
manufacture and facilities for testing, to undertake the manufacture on behalf of 
the applicant for a loan licence. 
353[***]. 
354[(3) Subject to the provisions of sub rule (2), the application for 
manufacture of more than ten items of each category of drugs on a loan licence, 
shall be accompanied by an additional fee at the rate of rupees three hundred for 
each additional item of drugs. 
(4) If the licensing authority is satisfied that a loan licence is defaced, 
damaged or lost, he may, on payment of a fee of rupees one thousand, issue a 
duplicate copy of loan licence.] 
75B.355[***]. 
356[76. Form of licences to manufacture drugs specified in Schedules C 
and C(l), excluding those specified in 357[Part XB and] Schedule X, or drugs 
specified in Schedules C, C( l) and X and the conditions for the grant 
358[***] of such licences. - 359[A licence to manufacture for sale or for 
distribution of drugs specified in Schedules C and C(l) other than 360[Large 
Volume Parenterals, Sera and Vaccines and Recombinant DNA (r -DNA) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
derived drugs,], drugs specified in Part XB and Schedule X shall be issued in 
Form 28 and a licence to manufacture for sale or distribution of drugs specified 
under Schedule C and C(l) (other than 360[Large Volume Parenterals, Sera and 
Vaccines and Recombinant DNA (r -DNA) derived drugs,], drugs specified in 
Part XB) and Schedule X shall be issued in Form 28B. A licence to manufacture 
for sale or for distribution of 360[Large Volume Parenterals, Sera and Vaccine 
and Recombinant DNA (r -DNA) derived drugs] shall be issued in Form 28D. 
Before a licence in Form 28 or Form 28B or Form 28D is granted 361[***], the 
following conditions shall be complied with by the applicant:—]] 
(1) The manufacture will be conducted under the active direction and 
personal supervision of competent technical staff consisting at least of one 
person who is a whole-time employee and who is— 
(a) a graduate in Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry of 362[a 
University established in India by law or has an equivalent qualification 
recognised and notified by the Central Government for such purpose] 
and has h ad at least eighteen months' practical experience after the 
graduation in the manufacture of drugs to which this licence applies, 
this period of experience may, however, be reduced by six months if the 
person has undergone training in manufacture of drugs to which the 
licence applies for a period of six months during his University course; 
or 
(b) a graduate in Science of 362[a University established in India by law 
or has an equivalent qualification recognised and notified by theC entral 
Government for such purpose] who for the purpose of his degree has 
studied Chemistry 363[or Microbiology] as a principal subject and has 
had at least three years' practical experience in the manufacture of drugs 
to which this licence applies after his graduation; or 
(c) a graduate in Medicine of 364[a University established in India by 
law or has an equivalent qualification recognised and notified by the 
Central Government for such purpose] with a t least three years' 
experience in the manufacture and pharmacological testing of biological 
products after his graduation; or 
365[(d) a graduate in Chemical Engineering of a University recognised 
by the Central Government with a t least three years' practical 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
experience in the manufacture of drugs to which this licence applies 
after his graduation; or 
(e) holding any foreign qualification the quality and content of training 
of which are comparable with those prescribed in clause ( a), clause (b), 
clause (c) or clause (d) and is permitted to work as competent technical 
staff under this rule by the Central Government:] 
 Provided that any person who was approved by the licensing 
authority as an expert responsible for the manufacture of drugs for the 
purpose of rule 76 read with rule 78 as these rules were in force 
immediately before the 29th June, 1957, shall be deemed to be qualified 
for the purposes of this rule: 
366[Provided further that for the drugs speci fied in Schedules C and C 
(1) meant for veterinary use, the whole time employee under whose 
supervision the manufacture is conducted may be a graduate in 
Veterinary Science or General Science or Medicine or Pharmacy of a 
University recognised by the Centra l Government and who has had at 
least three years' experience in the manufacture of biological products:] 
367[Provided also that for medical devices, the whole time employee 
under whose supervision the manufacture or testing is c onducted shall 
be— 
(i) a graduate in Pharmacy or Engineering (in appropriate branch) from 
a University recognised by the CentralGovernment for such purposes 
and has had at least eighteen months practical experience in the 
manufacturing or testing of device s to which this licence applies after 
his graduation; or 
(ii) a graduate in science, from a University recognised by the Central 
Government for such purposes, with Physics or Chemistry or 
Microbiology as one of the subject and has had at least three years 
practical experience in the manufacturing or testing of devices to which 
this licence applies after his graduation; or 
(iii) a diploma in Pharmacy or Engineering (in appropriate branch) 
from a Board or Institute recognised by the Central Government or t he 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
State Government, as the case may be, for such purposes and has had at 
least four years practical experience in the manufacturing or testing of 
devices towhich this licence applies after his diploma; or 
(iv) having a foreign qualification, the qualit y and content of training 
of which are comparable with those specified in clause (i), clause (ii) 
and clause (iii) and is permitted to work as competent technical staff 
under this rule by the Central Government.] 
368[(2) The appl icant proposing to manufac ture pharmaceutical products shall 
comply with the provisions referred to in Schedule M.] 
368[(2A) The applicant proposing to manufacture medical devices and in-vitro 
diagnostics shall comply with the qu ality management system as referred to in 
Schedule M-III.] 
368[(3) The applicant shall provide adequate space, plant and equipment for 
pharmaceutical products as referred to in Schedule M and for Medical devices 
and in-vitro diagnostics as referred to in Schedule M-III.] 
369[(4) The applicant shall provide and maintain adequate staff, premises and 
laboratory equipment for carrying out such tests of the strength, quality and 
purity of the substances as ma y be required to be carried out by him under the 
provisions of Part X of these rules including proper housing for animals used 
for the purposes of such tests, the testing unit being separate from the 
manufacturing unit and the head of the testing unit bein g independent of the 
head of the manufacturing unit:] 
Provided that the manufacturing units which before the commencement of the 
Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Rules, 1977, 370 were making arrangements 
with institutions approved by the licensing authority for such tests to be carried 
out on their behalf may continue such arrangement up to the 30th June, 1977: 
Provided further that for tests requiring sophisticated instrumentation 
techniques or biological or microbiological methods other than sterility the 
licensing authority may permit such tests to be conducted by institutions 
approved by it 371[under Part XV (A) of these rules] for this purpose.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
372[(4A) The head of the testi ng unit referred to in condition (4) shall possess a 
degree in Medicine or Science or Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry of a 
University recognised for this purpose and shall have experience in the testing 
of drugs, which in the opinion of the licensing authority is considered adequate.] 
(5) The applicant shall make adequate arrangements for the storage of drugs 
manufactured by him. 
373[(6) The applicant shall furnish to the licensing authority, if required to do so, 
data on the stability of drugs which are likely to deteriorate for fixing the date of 
expiry which shall be printed on the labels of such drugs on the basis of the date 
so furnished.] 
374[(7) The applicant shall, while applying for a licenc e to manufacture 
375[drugs], furnish to the licensing authority evidence and data justifying that the 
375[drugs]— 
(i) contain the constituent ingredients in therapeutic/prophylactic 
quantities as determ ined in relation to the claims or conditions for which 
the medicines are recommended for use or claimed to be useful; 
(ii) are safe for use in the context of the vehicles, excipients, additives 
and pharmaceutical aids used in formulations, and under the conditions in 
which the formulations for administration and use are commended; 
(iii) are stable under the conditions of storage recommended; and 
(iv) contain such ingredients and in such quantities for which there is 
therapeutic justification.] 
376[(v) have the approval, in writing, in favour of the applicant to 
manufacture drug formulations falling under the purview of new drug as 
defined in rule 122E, from the licensing authority as defined in clause (b) 
of rule 21.] 
377[(8) The licensee of p harmaceutical products shall comply with 
therequirements of 1191["Good Manufacturing Practices and Requirements of 
Premises, Plant and Equipment for Pharmaceutical Products"] as laid down in 
Schedule M and the licensee of Medical Devices and in-vitro diagnostics shall 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
comply with the requirements of "Quality Management System" as laid down in 
Schedule M-III.] 
378[(9) The applicant shall make application fo r grant of licence for a drug 
formulation containing single active ingredient only in proper name.] 
 379[Explanation.—For the purpose of this rule, 380["Large Volume 
Parenterals" sera and Vaccines and Recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs;] 
shall mean the sterile solutions intended for parenteral administration with a 
volume of 100 ml. or more (and shall include anti -coagulant solutions) in one 
container of the finished dosage form intended for single use.] 
381[(10) the applicant shall submit the result of bioequivalence study referred to 
in Schedule Y, along with the application for grant of a licence of oral dosage 
form of drugs specified under category II and category IV of t he 
biopharmaceutical classification system.] 
382[(11) In case the applicant intends to market the drug under a brand name or 
trade name, the applicant shall furnish an undertaking in Form 51 to the 
licensing authority to the effe ct that to the best of his knowledge based on 
search in trade marks registry, central data base for brand name or trade name of 
drugs maintained by Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation, literature 
and reference books on details of drug formulations in India, and internet, such 
or similar brand name or trade name is not already in existence with respect to 
any drug in the country and the proposed brand name or trade name shall not 
lead to any confusion or deception in the market.] 
383[76A, Forms of loan licences to manufacture for sale or for distribution 
drug specified in Schedules C and Cl excluding drugs specified in Schedule 
X or of Large Volume Parenterals, Sera and Vaccine and recombinant 
DNA(r-DNA) derived drugs, and conditions for the grant 384[***] of such 
licences.—A loan to licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of drugs 
specified in Schedules C and C(l), excluding drugs specified in Schedule X, and 
large Volume Parenterals, Sera and Vaccine and Recombinant DNA (r -DNA) 
derived drug specified in Part XB shall be issued in Form 28A and a loan 
licence to manufacture for sale or for distribution of Large Volume Parenterals, 
Sera and Vaccine and Recombinant DNA (r -DNA) derived drug s shall be 
issued in Form 28DA, and the] applicant shall, while applying for a licence to 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
manufacture 385[drugs] furnish to the Licensing Authority evidence and data 
justifying that the 385[drugs]— 
(i) contain the constituent ingredients in therapeutic/prophylactic 
quantities as determined in relation to the claims or conditions for which 
the medicines are recommended for use or claimed to be useful; 
(ii) are safe for use in the context of the vehi cles, excipients, additives 
and pharmaceutical aids used in the formulations and under the 
conditions in which the formulations for administration and use are 
recommended; 
(iii) are stable under the conditions of storage recommended; and 
(iv) contain such ingredients and in such quantities for which there is 
therapeutic justification.] 
386[(v) in case the applicant intends to market the drug under a brand 
name or trade name, the appli cant shall furnish an undertaking 
inForm 51 to the licensing authority to the effect that to the best ofhis 
knowledge based on search in trade marks registry, central data base for 
brand name or trade name of drugs maintained by Central Drugs Standard 
Control Organisation, literature and r eference books on details of drug 
formulations in India, and internet, such or similar brand name or trade 
name is not already in existence with respect to any drug in the country 
and the proposed brand name or trade name shall not lead to any 
confusion or deception in the market:] 
387[Provided that the application for grant of a licence for a drug formulation 
containing single active ingredient shall be made only in proper name.] 
388[77.Duration of lic ence.—(1) A licence issued in Form 28, Form 28B 
and Form 28D shall remain valid, if the licencee deposits a licence retention fee 
referred to in sub -rule (2) before the expiry of period of every succeed ing five 
years from the date of its issue, unless it i s s uspended or cancelled by the 
licensing authority. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(2) The licence retention fee r eferred to in sub-rule (1) shall be equivalentto 
the respective fee required for the grant of such licence excluding inspection fee 
paid for grant of licence. 
(3) If the licencee fails to pay licence retention fee on or before the due date 
as referred to in sub-rule (1), he shall be liable to pay licence retention fee along 
with a late fee calculated at the rate of two per cent, of the licence fee for every 
month or part thereof up to six months, and in the event of non-payment of such 
fee, the licence shall be deemed to have been cancelled.] 
389[78. Conditions of licence. —A licence in 390[Form 28, Form 28B or 
Form 28D] shall be subject to the special conditions, if any, set out in Schedule 
F or Schedule F(l), as the case may be, which relate to the substance in the 
respect of which the licence is granted and to the following general 
conditions:— 
(a) (i) The licensee shall provide and maintain an adequate staff and adequate 
premises and plant for the proper manufacture and storage of the substances 
in respect of which the licence is issued; 
(ii) without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing requirement, every 
holder o f a licence who for any purpose engaged in the culture or 
manipulation of pathogenic spore -bearing micro -organisms shall be 
provided to the satisfaction of the Licensing Authority separate laboratories 
and utensils and apparatus required for the culture or manipulation of such 
micro-organisms, the laboratories, utensils and apparatus so provided not 
being used for the manufacture of any other substance; 
391[(b) The licensee shall provide and maintain staff, premises and equipment as 
specified in rule 76;] 
392[(c) (i) The licensee shall maintain records of manufacture as per particulars 
given in Schedule U. 
(ii) The licensee shall either in his own laboratory or in any laboratory 
approved by the licensing authority 393[under Part XV (A) to these rules] test 
each batch or lot of the raw material used by him for the manufacture of his 
product and also each batch of the final product and shall maintain records 
or registers showing th e particulars in respect of such tests as specified in 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Schedule U. The records or registers shall be retained in the case of a 
substance for which a potency date if fixed for a period of two years from 
the expiry of such date, and in the case of other subs tances for a period of 
five years from the date of manufacture;] 
(d) The licensee shall allow an 394[Inspector appointed under the Act], to enter, 
with or without prior notice, any premises where the manufacture is carried 
on and to inspect the premises, and in the case of substances specified in 
Schedules C and C (1), to inspect the plant and the process of manufacture 
and the means employed for standardizing and testing the substance;] 
(e) The licensee shall allow an 394[Inspector, appointed under the Act], to 
inspect all registers and records maintained under these rules and to take 
samples of the manufactured product and shall supply to such Inspector such 
information as he may require for the purp ose of ascertaining whether the 
provisions of the Act and rules thereunder have been observed;] 
(f) The licensee shall from time to time report to the licensing authority any 
changes in the expert staff responsible for the manufacture or testing of the 
substance and any material alterations in the premises or plant used for that 
purpose which have been made since the date of the last inspection made on 
behalf of the licensing authority before the issue of the licence; 
395[(g) T he licensee shall on request furnish to the licensing authority, 
controlling authority or to such authorities as the licensing authority or the 
controlling authority may direct, from every batch of drugs as the licensing 
authority or the controlling Author ity may from time to time specify, a sample 
of such quantity as may be considered adequate by such authority for any 
examination and, if so required, also furnish full protocols of the tests which 
have been applied.] 
396[(h) If the licensing authority or the controlling authority so directs, the 
licensee shall not sell or offer for sale any batch in respect of which a sample is, 
or protocols are furnished under the last preceding sub -paragraph until a 
certificate authorizing the sale of the batch has been issued to h im by or on 
behalf of the licensing authority or the controlling authority;] 
397[(i) The licensee shall on being informed by the licensing authority or the 
controlling authority that any part of any batch of the substance has been found 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
by the licensing authority or the controlling authority not to conform with the 
standard of strength, quality or purity specified in these rules and on being 
directed so to do, withdraw the remainder of that ba tch from sale and so far as 
may in the particular circumstances of the case be practicable recall all issues 
already made from that batch;] 
(j) No drug manufactured under the licence shall be sold unless the precautions 
necessary for preserving its propert ies have been observed throughout the 
period after manufacture; 
398[(k) The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act and of these 
rules and with such further requirements, if any, as may be specified in any 
rules subsequently made under Chapter IV of the Act, provided that where such 
further requirements are specified in the rules, these would come into force four 
months after publication in the Official Gazette;] 
398[(1) The licensee shall m aintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an 
Inspector to record his impressions and defects noticed;] 
399[(m) The licensee shall maintain reference samples from each batch of the 
drugs manufactured by him in a quantity whi ch is at least twice the quantity of 
the drug required to conduct all the tests performed on the batch. In case of 
drugs bearing and expiry date on the label the reference samples shall be 
maintained for a period of three months beyond the date of expiry of potency. In 
case of drugs where no date of expiry of potency is specified on the label, the 
reference samples shall be maintained for a period of three years from the date 
of manufacture;] 
400[(n) The licence, who has been granted a licence in Form 28B shall— 
(i) forward to the licensing authority of the concerned States of 
manufacture and supply of drug a statement of the sales effected to the 
manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers, hospitals, dispensaries, Nursing 
Homes and Registered Medical Practitioners every three months; 
(ii) maintain accounts of all transactions giving details as indicated below 
in a register bound and serially page numbered, and such records shall be 
retained for a period of five years or one year after t he date of expiry of 
potency, whichever is later. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
A. Accounts of the drugs specified in Schedule X used for 
themanufacture— 
1. Date of issue. 
2. Name of the drug. 
3. Opening balance of stock on the production day. 
4. Quantity received, if any, and source from where received. 
5. Quantity used in manufacture. 
6. Balance quantity on hand at the end of the production day. 
7. Signature of the person in charge. 
B. Accounts of Production— 
1. Date of manufacture. 
2. Name of the drug. 
3. Batch number. 
4. Quantity of raw material used in manufacture. 
5. Anticipated yield. 
6. Actual yield. 
7. Wastage. 
8. Quantity of the manufactured goods transferred to stock. 
C. Accounts of manufactured drugs— 
1. Date of manufacture. 
2. Name of the drug. 
3. Batch Number. 
4. Opening Balance. 
5. Quantity manufactured. 
6. Quantity sold. 
7. Name of purchaser and his address. 
8. Balance quantity at the end of the day; 
(o) The licensee shall store drugs speci fied in Schedule X in bulk form and 
when any such drug is required for manufacture it shall be kept in a separate 
place under direct custody of a responsible person;] 
401[(p) The licensee shall comply with the requirements of 402["Good Laboratory 
Practices" as laid down in Schedule L -I and] 1191["Good Manufacturing 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Practices and Requirements of Premises, Plant and Equipment for 
Pharmaceutical Products"] as laid down in Schedule M.] 
403[(q) No advertisement of the drugs specified in Schedule H, Schedule HIor 
Schedule X shall be made except with the previous sanction ofthe Central 
Government.] 
404[(r) the applicant shall submit the result of bioequivalence study referred to in 
Schedule Y, along with the application for grant of a licence of oral dosage 
form of drugs specified under category II and categoryIV of the 
biopharmaceutical classification system.] 
405[78A.Conditions of licence in 405[Form 28A or Form 28DA]. —(1) The 
licence in 406[Form 28A or Form 28DA] shall be deemed to be cancelled or 
suspended, if the licence owned by the licensee in 407[408[Form 28 or Form 28D] 
whose manufacturing facilities have been availed of by the licensee is cancelled 
or suspended, as the case may be, under these rules. 
(2) The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act, and of these 
rules and with such further requirements if any, as may be specified in any rules 
subsequently made under Chapter IV of the Act, provided that where such 
further requirements are specified in the rules, those would come into force four 
months after publication in the Official Gazette. 
(3) The licensee shall test each batch or lot of the raw material used by him 
for the manufacture of his products and also each batch of the final product and 
shall maintain records or re gisters showing the particulars in respect of such 
tests as specified in Schedule U. Records or registers shall be retained, in the 
case of a substance for which a potency date is fixed, for a period of two years 
from the expiry of such date and in the cas e of other substances, for a period of 
five years from the date of manufacture. The licensee shall allow an Inspector to 
inspect all registers and records maintained under these rules and shall supply to 
the Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose of ascertaining 
whether the provisions of the Act and these rules have been observed. 
(4) The licensee shall either (i) provide and maintain to the satisfaction of 
the licensing authority adequate staff and adequate laboratory facilities fo r 
carrying out tests of the strength, quality and purity of the substances 
manufactured by him. or (ii) make arrangements with some institution approved 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
by the licensing authority for such tests to be regularly carried out on his behalf 
by the institution.] 
409[(5) The licensee shall furnish to the licensing authority, if required to do 
so, data on the stability of drugs which are likely to deteriorate for fixing the 
date of expiry which would be printed on the labels of such drug s on the basis 
of the date so furnished.] 
410[(6) The licensee shall maintain reference samples from each batch of the 
drugs manufactured by him in a quantity which is at least twice the quantity of 
the drug required to conduct a ll the tests performed on the batch. In case of 
drugs bearing an expiry date on the labels, the reference samples shall be 
maintained for a period of three months beyond the date of expiry of potency.] 
In case of drugs where no date of expiry of potency is specified on the label, the 
reference samples shall be maintained for a period of three years from the date 
of manufacture.] 
411[(7) The licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable 
an Inspector to record his impressions and the defects noticed.] 
412[(8) No advertisement of the drugs specified in Schedule H, Schedule HI 
or Schedule X shall be made except with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government.] 
413[(9) the applicant shall submit the result of bioequivalence study referred 
to in Schedule Y, along with the application for grant of a licence of oral dosage 
form of drugs specified under category II and category TV of the 
biopharmaceutical classification system.] 
414[79.Inspection before grant 415[***l of licence.—Before a licence under 
this part is granted 416[***] the licensing authority or Central Licence 
Approving Authority, as the case may be, shall cause the establishment in which 
the manufacture is proposed to be conducted or being conducted to be inspected 
by one or more Inspectors appointed under the Act with or without an expert in 
the field concerned. The Inspec tor or Inspectors shall examine all portions of 
the premises, plant and appliances and also inspect the process of manufacture 
intended to be employed or being employed along with the means to be 
employed or being employed for standardising and testing the drugs to be 
manufactured or being manufactured and enquire into the professional 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
qualifications of the Technical Staff to be employed. He shall also examine and 
verify the statements made in the application in regard to their correctness, and 
the capabili ty of the applicant to comply with the requirements of competent 
technical staff, manufacturing plants, testing equipments and the 'Requirements 
of Good Manufacturing Practices' and the 'Requirements of Plant and 
Equipment' as laid down in Schedule M read with the Requirements of 
Maintenance of records as laid down in Schedule U.] 
414[80.Report by Inspector. —(1) The Inspector shall forward a detailed 
descriptive report giving his findings on each aspect of inspection along with his 
recommendations after completion of his inspection in accordance with the 
provisions of rule 79, to the licensing authority or Central Licence Approving 
Authority, as the case may be.] 
81. Procedure of licensing authority. —(1) If the licensing authority 417[or 
Central Licence Approving Authority as the case may be] after such further 
enquiry, if any, as he may consider necessary, is satisfied that the requirements 
of the Rules under the Act have been complied with and that the c onditions of 
the licence and the rules under the Act will be observed, he shall issue a licence 
418[under this Part]. 
(2) If the licensing authority 417[or Central Licence Approving Authority as 
the cas e may be,] is not so satisfied, he shall reject the application and shall 
inform the applicant of the reasons for such rejection and of the conditions 
which must be satisfied before a licence can be granted and shall supply the 
applicant with a copy of the inspection report. 
419[82.Further application after rejection. —If within a period of six 
months from the rejection of an application for a licence the applicant informs 
the licensing authority 417[or Central Licence Approving Authority, as the case 
may be,] that the conditions laid down have been satisfied and deposits an 
inspection 420[fee of rupees two hundred and fifty] the licensing authority 421[or 
Central Licence Approving Authority, as the case may be,] may, if after causing 
a further inspection to be made, he is satisfied that the conditions for the grant 
of a licence have been complied with, 421[in respect of drugs notified under rule 
68A] issue a licence in Form 28 422[or Form 28B]. 
423[83.Duration of loan licence. —(1) A loan licence issued in Form 28A 
and Form 28DA shall remain valid, if the licencee deposits a licence retention 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
fee referred to in sub -rule (2) before the expiry of period of every succeeding 
five years from the date of its issue, unless it is suspended or cancelled by the 
licensing authority. 
(2) The licence retention fee referred to in sub -rule (1) shall be equivalent 
to the respective fee required for the grant of such licence excluding inspection 
fee paid for grant of licence. 
(3) If the licencee fails to pay licence retention fee on or before the due 
date as referred to in sub -rule (1), he shall be liable to pay licence retention fee 
along with a late fee calculated at the rate of two per cent, of the licence fee for 
every month or part thereof up to six months, and in the event of non -payment 
of such fee, the licence shall be deemed to have been cancelled.] 
83A. 424[***] 
83AA. 425[***] 
84. The provisions of this part shall apply to the manufacture of drugs for 
sale notwithstanding that such drugs are manufactured for sale outside India. 
426[427[84A. Provisions for appeal to the State Government or Central 
Government by party whose licence has not been granted 428[***]—Any 
person who is aggrieved by the order passed by the licensing authority or the 
CentralLicence Approving Authority, as the case may be, refusing to grant 
429[***] a licence 430[under this Part], may within thirty days from the date of 
receipt of such order, appeal to the State Government or Central Government, as 
the case may be, and the State Government or the Central Government may, 
after such enquiry into the matter, as is considered necessary and after giving 
the said person an opportuni ty for representing his views, may pass such order 
in relation thereto as it thinks fit.]] 
431[84AA. Additional information to be furnished by an applicant for 
licence or a licensee to the licensing authority.—The applicant for the grant of 
a licence or any person granted a licence under this Part shall, on demand, 
furnish to the licensing authority, before the grant of the licence or during the 
period the licence is in force, as the case may be, documentary evidence in 
respect of the ownership or occupation on rental or other basis of the premises, 
specified in the application for licence or in the licence granted, constitution of 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
the firm or any other relevant matter which may be required for the purpose of 
verifying the correct ness of the statements made by the applicant or the 
licensee, while applying for or after obtaining the licence, as the case may be.] 
432[84AB. Information to be uploaded by the licensee on online portal 
SUGAM.—(1) The licensee granted license under this Part shall register with 
portal SUGAM ( www.cdscoonline.gov.in) and upload information, as per the 
format provided in the said portal, pertaining to the licences granted for 
manufacture for sale or distribution of drugs and the information so provided 
shall be updated from time to time. 
(2) The information uploaded by the licensee with SUGAM portal under 
sub-rule (1), shall be verified by the concerned Licensing Authority.] 
433[84B. Prohibition for the manufacture for sale of cycl amates and 
preparations containing cycl amates.—No persons shall manufacture for sale 
cyclamates and preparations containing cyclamates.] 
434[84C.Inspection for verification of compliance.—(1) Before a licence in 
Form 28 or Form 28A or Form 28B or Form 28D or Form 28DA, is granted the 
licensing authority or Central Licence Approving Authority, as the case may be, 
shall cause the establishment in which the manu facture of drugs is proposed to 
be conducted or being conducted to be inspected jointly by the Drugs Inspectors 
appointed by the Central Government and the State Government under this Act, 
who shall examine the establishment intended to be used or being us ed for the 
manufacture of drugs. 
(2) The premises licensed under sub -rule (1) shall be inspected jointly by 
Inspector appointed by the Central Government and State Government to verify 
the compliance, with the conditions of licence and the provisions of th e Act and 
these rules, not less than once in three years or as needed as per risk based 
approach.] 
435[84D. Agreement for marketing. —No marketer shall adopt any drug 
manufactured by another manufacturer for marketing of such dru g by labeling 
or affixing his name on the label of the drug with a view for its sale and 
distribution without an agreement as referred to in clause (ea) of rule 2.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
436[84E. Responsibility of marketer of the drugs. —Any marketer w ho 
sells or distributes any drug shall be responsible for quality of that drug as well 
as other regulatory compliances along with the manufacturer under these rules.] 
437[85. Cancellation and suspension of licences. —(1) The Cent ral Licence 
Approving Authority may, after giving the licensee an opportunity to 
showcause, why such an order should not be passed by an order in writing 
stating the reasons therefor, cancel a licence issued under this Part, or suspend it 
for such period as he thinks fit either wholly or in respect of any of the drugs to 
which it relates 438[or direct the licensee to stop manufacture, sale or distribution 
of the said drugs and 439[thereupon order the destruction of drugs and] the stock 
thereof in the presence of an inspector], if in his opinion, the licensee has failed 
to comply with any of the conditions of the licence or with any provisions of the 
Act or rules made thereunder. 
(2) The licensing authorit y may, for such licences granted 440[***] by him, 
after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause why such an order should 
not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, cancel a 
licence issued under this part or suspend it for such period as he thinks fit either 
wholly or in respect of any of the drugs to which it relates 438[or direct the 
licensee to stop manufacture, sale or distribution of the said drugs and 
439[thereupon order the destruction of drugs and] the stocks thereof in the 
presence of an Inspector], if in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply 
with any of the conditions of the licence or with any provisions of the Act or 
rules made thereunder.] 
441[(3) A licensee whose licence has been suspended or cancelled by the 
Central Licence Approving Authority or licensing authority under sub -rule (1) 
or sub-rule (2), as the case may be, may within ninety days of the receipt of a 
copy of the order by him prefer an appeal to the Central Government or the 
State Government, as the case may be, and the Central Government or the State 
Government may after giving the licensee an opportunity of being heard, 
confirm, reverse or modify such order.] 
442[PART VIIA 
443[MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION] 
OF HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
85A. Manufacture on more than one set of premises. —If Homoeopathic 
medicines are manufactu red in more than one set of premises a separate 
application shall be made and a separate licence shall be obtained in respect of 
each such set of premises. 
85B. Application for licence to manufacture Homoeopathic medicines.— 
(1) Application for grant or renewal of 445[licences to manufacture for sale or for 
distribution] of Homoeopathic medicines shall be made to the licensing 
authority appointed by the State Government for the purpose of this Part 
(hereinafter in this Part referr ed to as the licensing authority) and shall be made 
in Form 24C. 
444[(2) The application in Form 24C shall be accompanied— 
(a) by a fee of 445[rupees two hundred] for the manufacture of 
Homoeopathic mot her tinctures and potentised preparations and 
aninspection fee of 446[rupees one hundred] for the first inspection or 
447[rupees fifty] in case of inspection for renewal of licence; 
(b) by a fee of 448[rupees two hundred] for the ma nufacture of 
Homoeopathic poten tised preparations only, and an inspection fee of 
446[rupees one hundred] for the first inspection and 449[rupees fifty] in case 
of inspection for renewal of licence; 
(c) by a fee of 450[rupees two hundred] for the manufacture of potentised 
preparations from back potencies by pharmacies which are already 
licensed to sell Homoeopathic medicines by retail and an inspection fee of 
446[rupees one hundred] for the first inspection or 449[rupees fifty] in case 
of inspection for renewal of licence. 
(3) If a person applied for renewal of a licence after its expiry but within 
six months of such expiry, the fee payable for the renewal of such a licence 
shall be— 
(a) 450[rupees two hundred] plus an additional fee at the rate of 450[rupees 
one hundred] per month or p art thereof and an inspection fee of 449[rupees 
fifty] for the manufacture of Homoeopathic mother tinctures and 
potentised preparations; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
451[(b) 452[rupees two hundred] plus an additional fee at the rate of 
452[rupees one hundred] per month or part thereof and an inspection fee of 
449[rupees fifty] for the manufacture of Homoeopathic potentised 
preparations only;] 
(c) 452[rupees two hundred] plus an additional fee at the rate of 452[rupees 
one hundred] per month or part thereof and an inspection fee of 449[rupees 
fifty] for the manufacture of potentised preparations from back potencies 
by pharmacies who are already licensed to sell Homoeopathic medicines 
by retail.] 
(4) A fee of 449[rupees fifty] shall be paid for a duplicate copy of the 
licence for the manufacture of Homoeopathic mother tincture and potentised 
preparations issued under sub -rule (1) if the original is defaced, damaged or 
lost; while the fee to be paid for such a duplicate copy of the licence for the 
manufacture of Homoeopathic potentised preparations only shall be 449[rupees 
fifty]. 
453[(5) Applications by licensee to manufacture a dditional items of 
Homoeopathic medicines shall be made to the licensing authority and such 
applications shall be accompanied by a fee of 449[rupees fifty] for each 
additional item.] 
85C. Application to manufacture 'New Homoeopat hic medicines'. —
Subject to the other provisions of these Rules,— 
(1) No 'New Homoeopathic medicine' shall be manufactured unless it is 
previously approved by the licensing authority mentioned in Rule 21; 
(2) the manufacture of 'New Homoeopathic medicine', when applying to the 
licensing authority mentioned in sub -rule (1) shall produce such documents 
and other evidence as may be required by the licensing authority for 
assessing the therapeutic efficacy of the medicine including the minimum 
provings carried out with it; 
(3) while applying for a licence to manufacture a 'New Homoeopathic 
medicine' an applicant shall produce alongwith his application evidence that 
the 'New Homoeopathic medicine' for the manufacture of which application 
is made has already been approved. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Explanation.—The term 'New Homoeopathic medicine' in this rule shall 
have the same meaning as in rule 30AA. 
454[85D. Form of licence to manufacture Homoeopathic medicines. —
Licence for manufacturer of Homoeopathic medicin es is a license to 
manufacture potentised preparations from back potencies by Pharmacies who 
are already licensed to sell Homoeopathic medicines by retail shall be granted in 
Form 25C.] 
85E. Conditions for the grant or renewal of a licence in Form 25C. —
Before a licence in Form 25C is granted or renewed the following conditions 
shall be complied with by the applicant:— 
(1) The manufacture of Homoeopathic medicines shall be conducted under 
the direction and supervision of competent technical staff consisting at least 
of one person who is a whole time employee 455[and who is— 
(a) a graduate in Science with Chemistry as one of the subjects with 
three years' experience in manufacture of Homoeopathic medicines; or 
(b) a graduate in Pharmacy with 18 months of experience in the 
manufacture of Homoeopathic medicines; or 
(c) holds qualification as defined under sub -clause (g) of clause (1) of 
section 2 of the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 (59 of 1973) 
with 18 months of experi ence in the manufacture of Homoeopathic 
medicines: 
 Provided that the persons who are already in employment with five 
years' experience in the manufacture < f Homoeopathic medicines and 
whose name was accordingly entered in any licence granted in Form 25C 
for manufacture of different classes of Homoeopathic medicines included 
in them shall be deemed to be qualified for the purpose of this rule.] 
456[(2) The factory premises shall comply with the requirements and 
conditions specified in Schedule M1: 
 Provided that where the licensing authority considers it necessary or 
expedient so to do, it may be having regard to the nature and extent of 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
manufacturing operations, relax or suitably alter the said requirements or 
conditions in any particular case for reasons to be recorded in writing.] 
457[(2A) Certificate of Good Manufacturing Practice. - The certificate of 
Good Manufacturing Practice to manufacturers, who comply with the 
requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices of Homeopathy drugs, as 
specified in Schedule M-I, shall be issued up to the date of validity of licence 
] 
(3) The applicant for manufacture of Homoeopathic mother tinctures shall 
either (i) provide and maintain adequate staff, premises and labor atory 
equipment for identifying the raw materials and for testing the mother 
tinctures wherever possible, or (ii) make arrangements with some institution 
approved by the licensing authority 458[under Part XV (A) of these rules] f or 
some tests, wherever possible, to be regularly carried out on his behalf by 
that institution. 
(4) The premises where Homoeopathic medicines are manufactured shall 
be distinct and separate from the premises used for residential purposes. 
(5) Homoeopathic medicines shall not be manufactured simultaneously with 
drugs pertaining to other systems of medicine. 
(6)The applicant shall make arrangements for proper storage of 
Homoeopathic medicines manufactured by him: 
459[Provided t hat in case potentised preparations are made in a Pharmacy 
holding licence in Form 20C, the conditions (2) and (3) shall not apply. The 
licensee shall ensure to the satisfaction of the licensing authority that th e 
products manufactured by it, conform to the claims made on the label.] 
460[85EA.Inspection before grant or renewal of licence. —Before a licence 
under this Part is granted or renewed in Form 25C or Form 26C, the licensing 
authority shall cause the establishment, in which the manufacture is proposed, 
to be conducted or being conducted, to be inspected by one or more Inspectors 
appointed under the Act. The inspector or Inspectors shall examine all portions 
of the premises, plant and appliances and also inspect the process of 
manufacture intended to be employed or being employed alongwith the means 
to be employed or being employed for standardising and testing the substances 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
to be manufactured and inquire into the professional qualifications of the 
technical staff to be employ ed. He shall also examine and verify the statements 
made in the application in regard to their correctness, and the capability of the 
applicant to comply with the requirements of competent technical staff, 
manufacturing plants, testing equipments and the r equirements of plant and 
equipment as laid down in Schedule M I read with the requirements of 
maintenance of records as laid down in Schedule U.] 
461[85EB.Report by Inspector.—The Inspector of Inspectors shall forward a 
detailed d escriptive report giving his or their findings on each aspect of 
inspection alongwith his or their recommendations after completion of his or 
their inspection to the licensing authority.] 
462[85EC.Grant or refusal of licence. —(1) If the licensing authority after 
such further enquiry, if any, as he may consider necessary is satisfied that the 
requirements of the rules under the Act have been complied with and that 
conditions of the licence and the rules under the Act shall be obser ved, he shall 
grant or renew a licence in Form 25C or Form 26C. 
(2) If the licensing authority is not so satisfied he shall reject the application 
and shall inform the applicant of the reasons for such rejection and of the 
conditions which must be satisfie d before a licence can be granted or renewed 
and shall supply the applicant with a copy of inspection report.] 
463[85ED. Further application after rejection. —If within a period of six 
months from the rejection of an application f or a licence, the applicant informs 
the licensing authority that the conditions laid down have been fulfilled and 
deposits an inspection fee of 465[rupees two hundred], the licensing authority 
may, if after causing further inspec tion to be made, he is satisfied that the 
conditions for the grant of licence have been complied with, issue a licence in 
Form 25C or Form 26C.] 
464[85EE. Appeal to the State Government.—Any person who is aggrieved 
by the order p assed by the Licencing Authority refusing to grant or renew a 
licence under this Part may within ninety days from the date of receipt of such 
order, appeal to the State Government and the State Government, may, after 
such enquiry into the matter as is cons idered necessary and after giving the said 
person an opportunity for representing the case pass such order as it thinks fit.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
85F. Duration of licence. —An original licence or a renewed licence unless 
it is sooner suspended or cancelled shall be 465[valid for a period of five years on 
and from the date on which], it is granted or renewed: 
466[Provided that if the application for renewal of a licence in force is made 
before its expiry or if the applicatio n is made within six months of its expiry, 
after payment of additional fee, the licence shall continue to be in force until 
orders are passed on the application and the licence shall be deemed to have 
expired if application for its renewal is not made with in six months of its 
expiry.] 
85G. Certificate of renewal. —The certificate of renewal of a licence in 
Form 25C shall be issued in Form 26C. 
85H. Conditions of licence.—A licence in Form 25C shall be subject to the 
conditions stated therein and to the following further conditions, namely:— 
(a) the licensee shall provide and maintain staff and premises as specified in 
rule 85E; 
(b) the licensee shall allow an 467[Inspector appointed under the Act] to 
enter, with or without prior notice, any premises wheie the manufacture of a 
Homoeopathic medicine in respect of which the licence is issued is carried 
on, to inspect the premises and to take samples of the manufactured 
Homoeopathic medicines; 
(c) the licensee shall allow an Inspe ctor to inspect all registers and records 
maintained under these rules and shall supply to the Inspector such 
information as he may require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the 
provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder have been observed; 
468[(d) the licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable 
an Inspector to record his impressions and defects notice;] 
(e) the licensee shall comply with the following conditions in respect of 
mother tinctures manufactured by him:— 
(i) the crude drug used in the manufacture of the mother tincture shall be 
identified and records of such identification shall be kept 469[for a period 
of five years]; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(ii) the total solids in the mother tincture shall be determined and records 
of such tests shall be kept 469[for a period of five years]; 
(iii) the alcohol content in the mother tincture shall be determined and 
records of the same shall be maintained 2[for a period of five years]; 
(iv) the containers of mother tinctures shall preferably be of glass and 
shall be clean and free from any sort of impurities of adhering matter. 
The glass shall be neutral as far as possible; 
(v) in the process of manufacture of mother tincture s hygienic 
conditions shall be scrupulously observed by the licensee. Storage and 
handling conditions shall also be properly observed by the licensee 
according to Homoeopathic principles; 
470[(ea) no colour shall be added to any Homoeopathic medicines: 
 Provided that caramel may be added to combinations of Homoeopathic
 preparations with syrup base;] 
(f) records shall be maintained of Homoeopathic medicines containing 
alcohol and the quantities sold together with names and addresse s of parties 
to whom sold. 468[Such records shall be maintained for a period of five 
years.] 
471[85HH. Additional information to be furnished by an applicant for 
licence or a licensee to the licensing authority.—The applicant for the grant of 
licence or any other person granted a licence under this Part shall, on demand, 
furnish to the licensing authority, before the grant of the licence or during the 
period the licence is in force, as the case may be, d ocumentary evidence in 
respect of the ownership or occupation in rental or other basis of the premises, 
specified in the application for licence or in the licence granted, constitution of 
the firm, or any other relevant matter which may be required for the purpose of 
verifying the correctness of the statements made by the applicant or the 
licensee, while applying for or after obtaining the licence as the case may be.] 
85-I. Cancellation and suspension of licences. —(1) The licensing 
authority may, after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause why such 
an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
therefor, cancel a licence issued under this Part or suspend it for such period as 
he thinks fit, either wholly or in respect of some of the substances to which it 
relates if, in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the 
conditions of the licence or with any provisions of the Act or rules made 
thereunder. 
472[(2) A licensee whose lice nce has been suspended or cancelled may, 
within three months of the date of the order under sub -rule (1), prefer an appeal 
against that order to the State Government, which shall decide the same.]] 
PART VIII 
MANUFACTURE FOR EXAMINATION, TEST OR ANALYSIS 
86.Conditions relating to manufacture for examination, test or 
analysis.—Theprovisions of section 18 of the Act shall not apply to the 
manufacture of any drug in small quantities for the purpose of examination, test 
or analysis if the conditions prescribed in this Part are fulfilled. 
87. Labelling.—Any drug manufactured for the purpose of examination, test 
or analysis shall be kept in containers bearing labels, indicating the purpose for 
which it has been manufactured. 
88.Labelling of drugs supplied to other persons.—If any drug 
manufactured for the purpose of examination, test or analysis is supplied by the 
manufacturer to any other person, the container shall bear a label on which shall 
be stated the name and address of the manufacturer, the accepted scient ific 
name of the substance if known, or if not known a reference which will enable 
the substance to be identified and the purpose for which it has been 
manufactured. 
89. Licence.—If the person proposing to manufacture a drug for the purpose 
of examination, test or analysis does not hold a licence in Form 25 or Form 28 
in respect of such drugs he shall, before commencing such manufacture, obtain 
a licence in Form 29: 
473[Provided that in the case of a drug the composition of which is such that 
the drug is not generally recognised among experts qualified by scientific 
training and experience to evaluate the safety of drugs as safe for use, no licence 
in Form 29 shall be granted unless the applicant produces a certificate from the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
licensing authority mentioned in rule 21, to the effect that there would be no 
objection to such licence being granted.] 
90. Form of application.—474[(1)] An application for a licence in Form 29 
shall be made to the licensing autho rity appointed by the State Government for 
the purposes of this Part (hereafter in this Part referred to as the licensing 
authority) in Form 30 and shall be made by or countersigned by the head of the 
institution in which, or a director of the firm or comp any by which, the 
substance will be manufactured. 
475[(2) Every application in 476[Form 30] shall be accompanied by 477[a fee of 
rupees two hundred and fifty].] 
478[(3) The license in Form 29 may be granted by the licensing authority 
within a period of seven working days from the date of receipt of the application 
duly completed in Form 30, and in case where no communication is received by 
the applicant from licensing authority within the said period of seven days, the 
licensing authority shall be deemed to have granted the license.] 
91.Duration of licence. —A licence in Form 29 shall, unless sooner 
cancelled, be in force for a period of 479[three years from the date of issue], and 
may thereafter be renewed for periods of one year at a time. 
92. Conditions of Licence. —A licence in Form 29 shall be subject to the 
following conditions:— 
(a) the licensee shall use the drugs manufa ctured under the licence 
exclusively for purpose of examination, test or analysis, and shall carry 
on the manufacture and examination, test or analysis at the place 
specified in the licence; 
(b) the licensee shall allow any 480[Inspector appointed under the Act] to 
enter, with or without notice, the premises where the drugs are 
manufactured and to satisfy himself that only examination, test or 
analysis work is being conducted; 
(c) the licensee shall keep a record of the quantity o f drugs 
manufactured for examination, test or analysis and of any person or 
persons to whom the drugs have been supplied; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(d) the licensee shall comply with such further requirements, if any, 
applicable to the holders of licences in Form 29 as may be speci fied in 
any Rules subsequently made under the Act and of which the licensing 
authority has given him not less than one months' notice. 
(e) the licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book to enable an 
Inspector to record his impressions and defects noticed. 
93. Cancellation of licences .—(1)The licensing authority may, after giving 
the licensee an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be 
passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, cancel a licence 
issued under this Part, eith er wholly or in respect of some of the substances to 
which it relates, if, in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of 
the conditions of the licence or with any provision of the Act or rules 
thereunder. 
481[(2) A licensee whose licence has been suspended or cancelled may appeal 
to the State Government within three months of the date of the order.] 
PART IX 
LABELLING AND PACKING OF DRUGS OTHER THAN 
HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES 
94. Exemption of certain drugs from certa in provisions of this Part .—
(1)Labels on packages or containers of drugs for export shall be adapted to meet 
the specific requirements of the law of the country to which the drug is to be 
exported but the following particulars shall appear in a conspicuous position on 
the innermost container in which the drug is packed and every other covering in 
which that container is packed— 
(a) name of the drug; 
(b) the name, address of the manufacturer and the number of the licence 
under which the drug has been manufactured; 
(c) batch or lot number; 
(d) date of expiry, if any: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
482[Provided that where a drug, not classified under Schedule F, Schedule 
F(l) and Schedule X, 483[or blood products defined under rule 122 EA] is 
required by the consignee to be not labelled with the name and address of the 
manufacturer, the labels on packages or containers shall bear a code number as 
approved by the licensing authority mentioned in rule 21.] 
484[Provided further that where a drug classified as Narcotic Drug or 
Psychotropic Substance is to be exported under a code number, the same may 
be permitted by the said Licensing Authority on the following conditions, 
namely:— 
(i) each consignment of export shall be accompanied with requisite import 
licence from the importing country; 
(ii) the applicant shall obtain a no objection certificate from the Drugs 
Controller, India for manufacture of such formulations to be exported with 
code number against e ach export order alongwith certificate from the 
regulatory authority of the importing country controlling Narcotics drugs 
and Psychotropic Substances that they do not have any objection for the 
import of the drug with code number; 
(iii) the state Licensing Authority shall issue the manufacturing licence for 
these formulations on each export order on the basis of a no objection 
certificate from Drugs Controller, India; 
(iv) a no objection certificate shall be obtained from the Drugs Controller, 
India for export of each consignment; and 
(v) a no objection certificate shall be obtained from the Narcotic 
Commissioner of India, Gwalior for export of each consignment of the 
drug.] 
485[(2) The provisions or rules 96 to 101 inclusive, sh all not apply to a 
medicine made up ready for treatment, whether after or without dilution, which 
is supplied on the prescription of a registered medical practitioner provided 
that— 
(i) the medicine is labelled with the following particulars:— 
(a) the name and address of the supplier; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) the name of the patient and the quantity of the medicine; 
(c) the number representing serial number of the entry in the 
prescription register; 
(d) the dose, if the medicine is for internal use; 
486[(e) the words Tor External use only' shall be printed on the label if 
the medicine is for external application;] 
(ii) Condition (3) of the conditions in rule 65 is satisfied.] 
95. Prohibition of sale or distribution unless labelled. —Subject to the 
other provisions of these rules, no person shall sell or distribute any drug 
(including a patent or proprietary medicine) unless it is labelled in accordance 
with these rules. 
487[96. Manner of Labelling.—(1) Subject to the other provisions of these 
rules, the following particulars shall be either printed or written in indelible ink 
and shall appear in a conspicuous manner on the label of the innermost 
container of any drug and on every other covering in which the container is 
packed, namely:— 
(i) The name of the drug: 
(A) 488[For this purpose, the proper name of the drug or fixed dose 
combination drug other than fixed dose combinations of vitamin and other 
fixed dose combinations containing three or more drugs, shall be printed or 
written in a conspicuous manner which shall be 489[***] at least two font 
size larger than the brand name or the trade name, if any, and in other cases 
the brand name or the trade name, if any, shall be written 490[***] below or 
after the proper name and shall be.]— 
(a) for drugs included in Schedule F or Schedule F(l), the name given 
therein; 
(b) for drugs included in the Indian Pharmacopoeia or the official 
Pharmacopoeias and official compendia of drug st andards prescribed in 
rule 124, the name or synonym specified in the respective official 
pharmacopoeias and official compendia of drug standards followed by the 
letters 'L.P.' or, as the case may be, by the recognised abbreviations of the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
respective official pharmacopoeia and official compendia of drug 
standards; 
(c) for drugs included in the National Formulary of India, the name or 
synonym specified therein followed by the letters ‘N.F.I’; 
(d) for other drugs, the inte rnational non -proprietary name, if any, 
published by the World Health Organisation or where an international 
non-proprietary name is not published, the name descriptive of the true 
nature or origin of the substance. 
491[***] 
492[(AA) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the additional 
requirements of labeling specified vide notification number G.S.R. 222(E) dated 
the 13th March, 2018 published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part -II - 
Section (3) - Sub-section(i) shall be on voluntary basis for a period beginning 
on the 13th September, 2018 and ending on the 31st March, 2019 and thereafter 
shall be mandatory.] 
(ii) A correct statement of the net contents in terms of weight, measure, 
volume, number of units of contents, number of units of activity, as the case 
may be, and the weight, measure and volume shall be expressed in Metric 
system. 
(iii) The content of active ingredients— 
This shall be expressed— 
(a) for oral liquid preparation s in terms of the content per single dose, 
the dose being indicated in 5 millilitres 493[***]: 
 Provided that where the dose is below 5 millilitres the contents of 
active ingredients may be expressed in terms of one millilitre 494[or 
fraction thereof]; 
 495[Provided further that where the single dose is more than 5 
millilitre, the content of active ingredients shall be expressed in terms 
of minimum single dose as approved by the licensing authority,] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) for liquid parenteral preparations ready for administration, in terms 
of 1 millilitre or percentage by volume or per dose in the case of a 
single dose container: 
 Provided that if the preparation is contained in an ampoule it wi ll 
be enough if the composition is shown on the label or wrapper affixed 
to any package in which such ampoule is issued for sale; 
(c) for drugs in solid form intended for parenteral administration in 
terms of units or weight per milligramme or gramme; 
(d) for tablets, capsules, pills and the like, in terms of the content in 
each tablet, capsule, pill or other unit, as the case may be; 
(e) for other preparations, in terms of percentage by weight or volume 
or in terms of unitage per gram or millilitre as the case may be: 
 Provided that clause (ii) shall not apply to a pharmacopoeial 
preparation where the composition of such preparation is specified in 
the respective pharmacopoeia and to a preparation included in the 
National Formulary of India; 
(iv) 496[The name of the manufacturer and the address of the premises of 
the manufacturer where the drug has been manufactured:] 
 Provided that if the drug is contained in an ampoule or a similar small 
container, it shall be enough if only t he name of the manufacturer and his 
principal place of 497[manufacture] is shown. 
(v)A distinctive batch number, that is to say, the number by reference to 
which details of manufacture of the particular batch from which the 
substance in the container is taken are recorded and are available for 
inspection, the figure representing the batch number being preceded by the 
words 'Batch No.' or 'B No.' or 'Batch' or 'Lot No.' or 'Lot'. 
Notes. 
(1) In the case of drugs manufactured by a continuous process, like 
manufacture of magnesium sulphate, pharmaceutical chemicals, etc., the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
production resulting in one homogeneous mix of the finished products 
shall be considered as one "Batch": 
(2) In the case of powers, liquid orals, ointments, etc., one "Batch 
Number" shall be assigned to all the containers filed from one 
homogeneous bulk. 
(3) In the case of tablets, capsules, lozenges, torches, etc. one "Batch 
Number" shall be assigned to the products manufactured from one 
homogeneous mix ready for compression or filing. 
(4) In case of parental preparations sterilized by steam under pressure, 
one "Batch Number" shall be assigned to all containers filed from one 
homogeneous bulk solution and sterilized load. 
(5) In the case of container s of parental preparations filed from one 
homogeneous bulk solution and sterilized in more than one sterilizer 
load, the "Batch Number" as signed to the containers in the different 
sterilizer loads shall be same "Batch Number" as is assigned to the 
homogeneous bulk solution, provided the samples taken from all the 
sterilizer loads pass the sterility test, and kept separate from one another 
until the report of the sterility test is available. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of chemical and other tests, 
representative samples from all containers filled from the homogeneous 
bulk solution should be taken. 
(6) In the case of parental and other sterile products filled aseptically a 
"Batch Number shall be assigned to all containers filled from one 
homogeneous mix d uring one filling operation, the filling operation 
being completed in a period of not more than a day during which no 
schedule change in the filling assembly is made. When containers are 
filled from one homogeneous mix, in a number of filling operations, t he 
"Batch Number" assigned to the containers filled in individual filling 
operations shall be the same "Batch Number" as is assigned to the 
homogeneous mix, provided the samples taken from all the direction 
filling operations pass the sterility tests, and are kept separate from one 
another until the report of the sterility test is available. Explanation.—

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
For the purpose of chemical and other tests, representative samples from 
all containers filled from the homogeneous mix should be taken. 
(7) In the case of medicinal gases produced by a continuous process of 
operation a week's production from one tank load shall be considered as 
a Batch. 
(vi) Every drug manufactured in India shall bear on its label the number 
of the licence under which the drug is manuf actured, the figure 
representing the manufacturing licence number being preceded by the 
words 'Manufacturing Licence Number' or 'Mfg. Lie. No.' or 'M.L.'. 
(vii) Drugs specified in Schedule P and their preparations including 
combinations with other drugs sh all bear on their labels the date of 
manufacture and the date of expiry of potency, and the period between the 
date of manufacture and the date of expiry shall not exceed that laid down 
in the said Schedule 498[under the conditio ns of storages specified therein. 
499[Drugs and their] preparations not included in Schedule P, shall bear on 
their labels the date of their manufacture and also the date of their expiry 
which shall not exceed sixty months from the date of manufacture]: 
 Provided that this period may be extended by the licensing authority 
specified in clause (b) of rule 21 in respect of any specified drug if 
satisfactory evidence is produced by the manufacturer to justify such an 
extension. 
500[(viii) drugs specified in schedule C(l) and their preparations including 
combinations in other drugs shall bear on their labels (a) the date of 
manufacture, and (b) date of expiry of potency fixed by the manufacturer:] 
 501[Provided that drugs in bulk form included in Schedule C(l) which are 
not ready for use and not included in Schedule P need not bear on the label 
the date of expiry of potency:] 
 Provided further that no reference shall be made to any ot her licence 
number granted by any authority outside India on any label or container or 
in any covering in which the container is packed or in any other matter or 
advertisement enclosed therewith. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(ix) Every drug intended for distribution to the medical pro fession as a free 
sample shall, while complying with the labelling provisions under clauses 
(i) to (viii), further bear on the label of the container the words 'Physician's 
sample—Not to be sold' which shall be overprinted. 
502[(x) If any preparation contains not less than 3 per cent, by volume of 
alcohol the quantity of alcohol shall be stated in terms of the average 
percentage by volume of absolute alcohol in the finished products.] 
503[(xi) 504[In addition to the other particulars which are required to be 
printed or written under these rules, the label of inner most container of the 
following categories of drugs and every other covering in which 
thecontainer is packed shall b ear a caution or warning, as applicable, 
depending on whether the drug is covered under Schedule G or Schedule H 
or Schedule H 1 or Schedule X, as specified in rule 97, in legible black 
coloured font size in a completely red rectangular box without disturb ing 
other conditions printed on the label under these rules, namely:—- 
 Narcotic analgesics, hypnotics, sedatives, tranquillisers, corticosteroids, 
hormones, hypoglycemic, antimicrobials, antiepileptics, antidepressants, 
anticoagulants, anti -cancer drugs a nd all other drugs falling under 
Schedules G, H, H 1 and Schedule X whether covered or not in the above 
list: 
 Provided that if any of the drug referred above category is not covered 
under any of the Schedule, namely, Schedule G, ScheduleH, Schedule H 1 
and Schedule X, the label of inner most container of drugs and every other 
covering in which the container is packed shall bear caution or warning, as 
the case may be, applicable for that drugs covered under Schedule H as 
specified in rule 97:] 
505[Provided further that] the provisions of this clause shall not apply to— 
(a) preparations intended for animal treatment; 
(b) preparations intended for external use; 
(c) ophthalmic preparations and ear drops; and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(d) sterile preparations s uch as sutures, surgical dressings and 
preparations intended for parenteral use.] 
506[(xii) Drugs and their preparations including combinations with other 
drugs imported into the country shall also bear on the label, the licence 
number under which the drug is imported, preceded by the words "Import 
Licence" and the name arid address of the importer.] 
507[(xiii) The name of the marketer of the drug and its address, in case the 
drug is marketed by a marketer: 
 Provided that if the drug is contained in an ampoule or a similar small 
container, it shall be enough if only the name of the marketer is shown.] 
(2) (i) The particulars to be printed or written on the label of a mechanical 
contraceptive shall be as specified in Schedule R. 
(ii) The following particulars, in addition to those specified under sub -rule(1) 
shall be either printed or written in indelible ink and shall appear in a 
conspicuous manner on the label of the innermost container and on every other 
covering in which the container of a contraceptive, other than a mechanical 
contraceptive, is packed, namely:— 
(a) the date of manufacture; 
(b) the date up to which the contraceptive is expected to retain its 
properties; 
(c) the storage conditions n ecessary for preserving the properties of the 
contraceptive up to the date indicated in sub-clause (b): 
Provided that for oral contraceptives it shall be sufficient to display on the 
label of the container the date of manufacture only. 
(3) (i) The particulars prescribed in sub-rule (1) shall be printed or written in 
indelible ink either on the label borne by a container or vaccine lymph or on a 
label or wrapper affixed to any package in which the container is issued for sale. 
The said particulars shall be indelibly marked on the sealed container of surgical 
ligature or suture or printed or written in indelible ink on a label enclosed 
therein. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(ii) Nothing in these rules shall be deemed to require the labelling of any 
transparent cover or of any wrapper, case or other covering used solely for the 
purpose of packing, transport or delivery. 
(4) Where by any provision of these rules any particulars are required to be 
displayed on a label on the container such particulars may, instead of being 
displayed on a label , be etched, painted or otherwise indelibly marked on the 
container: 
Provided that, except where otherwise provided in these rules, the name of 
the drug or any distinctive letters intended to refer to the drug shall not be 
etched, painted or otherwise inde libly marked on any glass container other than 
ampoules. 
 1333[(5) Every active pharmaceutical ingredient (bulk drug) manufactured or 
imported in India shall bear Quick Response code on its label at each level 
packaging that sto re data or information readable with software application to 
facilitate tracking and tracing. The stored data or information shall include the 
following minimum particulars, namely:— 
(i) Unique product identification code, 
(ii) Name of the API, 
(iii) Brand name (if any), 
(iv) Name and address of the manufacturer, 
(v) Batch no., 
(vi) Batch size, 
(vii) Date of manufacturing, 
(viii) Date of expiry or retesting, 
(ix) Serial shipping container code, 
(x) Manufacturing licence no. or import licence no. 
(xi) Special storage conditions required (if any).] 

1339[(6) The manufacturers of drug formulation products as specified in 
Schedule H2 shall print or affix Bar Code or Quick Response Code on its 
primary packaging label or, in case of ina dequate space in primary package 
label, on the secondary package label that store data or information legible with 
software application to facilitate authentication. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(7) The stored data or information referred to in sub-rule (6) shall include the 
following particulars, namely:— 
(i) unique product identification code; 
(ii) proper and generic name of the drug; 
(iii) brand name; 
(iv) name and address of the manufacturer; 
(v) batch number; 
(vi) date of manufacturing; 
(vii) date of expiry; and 
(viii) manufacturing licence number.] 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this rule, the date of expiry shall be in 
terms of month and year and it shall mean that the drug is recommended till the 
last day of the month. The date of expiry shall be preceded by the words 'Expiry 
date'.] 
97. Labelling of medicines.—508[(1) The container of a medicine for 
internaluse shall— 
509[(a) if it contains a drug substance specified in Schedule G, be labeled 
with following words in leg ible black coloured font size in completely red 
rectangular box: 
SCHEDULE G PRESCRIPTION DRUG - CAUTION 
It is dangerous to take this preparation except under medical 
supervision. 
(b) if it contains a drug su bstance specified in Schedule H , be labeled with 
symbol Rx and conspicuously displayed on the left top comer of the label and 
shall also be labeled with the following words in legible black coloured font 
size in completely red rectangular box: 
SCHEDULE H PRESCRIPTION DRUG - CAUTION 
Not to be sold by ret ail without the prescription of a Registered 
Medical Practitioner. 
(c) if it contains a drug substance specified in Schedule H and comes within the 
purview of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1985) be labeled with symbol NR x, which shall be in red and conspicuously 
displayed on the left top comer of the label and shall also be labeled with the 
following words in legible black coloured font size in completely red 
rectangular box: 
SCHEDULE H PRESCRIPTION DRUG - WARNING 
To be s old by retail on the prescription of a Registered Medical 
Practitioner only. 
(d) if it contains a drug substance specified in Schedule X, be labeled with 
symbol XRx, which shall be in red and conspicuously displayed on the left top 
comer of the label and shall also be labeled with the following words in legible 
black coloured font size in completely red rectangular box: 
SCHEDULE X PRESCRIPTION DRUG - WARNING 
To be sold by retail on the prescription of a Registered Medical 
Practitioner only. 
(e) if it con tains a drug su bstance specified in Schedule H1 , be labeled with 
symbol Rx, which shall be in red and conspicuously displayed on the left top 
comer of the label and shall also be labeled with the following words in legible 
black coloured font size in completely red rectangular box: 
SCHEDULE HI PRESCRIPTION DRUG - CAUTION 
- It is dangerous to take this preparation except in accordance with the 
medical advice. 
- Not to be sold by retail without the prescription of a Registered Medical 
Practitioner. 
(f) if it contains a drug substance specified in Schedule H1 and comes within the 
purview of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 
1985) be labeled with symbol NRx, which shall be in red and conspicuously 
displayed on the left top co mer of the label and shall also be labeled with the 
following words in legible black coloured font size in completely red 
rectangular box: 
SCHEDULE H1 PRESCRIPTION DRUG - CAUTION 
- It is dangerous to take this preparation except in accordance with the 
medical advice. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
- Not to be sold by retail without the prescription of a Registered Medical 
Practitioner.] 
(2) The container of an embrocation, liniment, lotion, 510[ointment, 
antiseptic cream,] liquid antiseptic or other liqu id medicine for external 
application shall be labelled with the words in capital Tor External use only'.] 
511[(3) The container of a medicine made up ready only for treatment of an 
animal shall be labelled conspicuously with the words 'Not for human use; for 
animal treatment only', and shall bear a symbol depicting the head of a domestic 
animal.] 
512[(3A) The container of a medicine for treatment of food producing 
animals shall be labelled with the withd rawal period of the drug for the species 
on which it is intended to be used: 
Provided that if the specific withdrawal period has not been validated, the 
withdrawal period shall not be less than seven days for eggs or milk, twenty 
eight days for meat from p oultry and mammals including fat and offal, five 
hundred degree days for fish meat. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this rule, the withdrawal period is the 
period of interval between the last administration of a veterinary medicine to 
animals under the nor mal conditions of use and the production of food stuff 
from such animals to ensure that food stuffs do not contain residues in 
quantities in excess of the maximum residue limits laid down.] 
513[(4) The container of a medicine prepared for treatment of human ailments 
shall if the medicine contains industrial methylated spirit, indicate this fact on 
the label and be labelled with the words— 
"FOR EXTERNAL USE ONLY".] 
514[(5) Substances specified in Schedule X in bulk form shall bear a label 
wherein the symbol as specified in sub -rule (1) shall be given conspicuously in 
red letters.] 
515[97A. Modified application of rules 96 and 97 for certain period. — 
Notwithstanding anything cont ained in these rules, the modified or additional 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
requirements of labelling as may be specified in the notification of the 
Government of India in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare number 
G.S.R. 408(E), dated the 26th April, 2018, shall be on volunta ry basis for a 
period commencing on the date of coming into force of this rule and ending on 
the 31st day of March, 2019, and thereafter shall be mandatory.] 
516[***] 
517[102. Non -Sterile Surgical Ligat ure and Suture. —Every container of, 
and wrapper enclosing surgical ligature or suture other than a ligature or suture 
offered or intended to be offered for sale as sterile, shall bear a label on which 
are printed or written in a conspicuous manner in indel ible red ink the words 
"Non-sterile surgical ligature (suture) —not to be used for operations upon the 
human body unless efficiently sterilized".] 
103. 518[***] 
(2) The name and address of the manufacturer shall be printed on the label of 
the container of a patent or proprietary medicine. 
519[(3) The true formula or list of the ingredients shall be printed or written in 
indelible ink on the outer label of every package containing patent or 
proprietary medicine ] 
520[104. Use of letters I.F., etc. —The letters T.P., and recognised 
abbreviations of pharmacopoeias and official compendia of drug standards 
prescribed under these rules shall be entered on the label of the drug only for the 
purpose of indicating that the drug is in accordance with standards set out in the 
Indian Pharmacopoeia or in any such pharmacopoeia or official compendium of 
drug standards recognised under the rules.] 
521[104A. Prohibition against altering inscriptions on containers, labels 
or wrappers of drug. —No person shall alter, obliterate or deface any 
inscription or mark made or recorded by the manufacturer on the container, 
label or wrapper of any drug: Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to 
any alteration, any inscription or mark made on the container, label or wrapper 
of any drug at the instance or direction or with the permission of the licensing 
authority.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
522[105. Packing of drugs.—(1) The pack sizes of drugs meant for retail sale 
shall be as prescribed in Schedule PI to these rules. 
(2) The pack sizes of drugs not covered by the Schedule PI shall be as 
given below: 
Unless specified otherwise in Schedule PI,— 
(i) The pack sizes for Tablets/Capsules shall be— 
Where the number of Tablets (coated or uncoated)/Capsules (hard or soft 
gelatine) is less than 10, such packing shall be made by the integral 
number. For numbers above 10, the pack sizes of Tablets/Capsules shall 
contain multiples of 5 1342[or 7]. 
(ii) The pack sizes for liquid Oral preparations shall be 30 ml. (paediatric 
only) 60 ml./100 ml./200 ml./450 ml. 
(iii) The pack sizes for Paediatric Oral Drops shall be 5 ml./lO ml./15 ml. 
(iv) The pack sizes for Eye/Ear/Nasal Drops shall be 3 ml. /5 ml./ 10 ml. 
(v) The pack sizes for Eye Ointment shall be 3 gm/5 gm/10 gm: Provided 
that the provisions of the pack sizes covered under this rule shallnot apply 
to— 
1. Pack sizes or dosage forms not covered by t he foregoing 
provisions of this rule. 
2. The imported formulations in finished form. 
3. Preparations intended for Veterinary use. 
4. Preparations intended for Export. 
5. Vitamins/Tonics/Cough Preparations/Antacids/Laxatives in Liquid 
Oral forms, Unit dose (including applicaps). 
6.Pack sizes of dosage forms meant for retail sale to Hospitals, 
Registered Medical Practitioners, Nursing Homes. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
7. Physician's Samples. 
8. Pack sizes of Large Volume intravenous Fluids: 
523[Provided further that] pack sizes of any of the new drug as and when 
approved by the licensing authority appointed under rule 21 and if not covered 
under this rule, shall be examined for the purpose of approval with specific 
justification by the said licensing authority: 
524[525[Provided also that] Oxytocin injection meant for sale shall be in 
single unit blister pack only:] 
526[Provided also that Diclofenac injection for human use shall be in single 
unit dose pack only.] 
527[105A. Packing of drugs specified in Schedule X.—The drugs 
specified in Schedule X shall be marketed in packings not exceeding— 
(i) 100 unit doses in the case of tablets/capsules; 
(ii) 300 ml. in the case of oral liquid preparation; 
(iii) and 5 ml. in the case of injections: 
Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to packings meant for use of a 
hospital or a dispensary subject to the conditions that— 
(i) such supplies are made by the manufacturers or distributors direct to the 
hospital/dispensaries; and 
(ii) hospital packs shall not be supplied to a retail dealer or to a Registered 
Medical Practitioner.] 
528[106. Diseases which a drug may not purport to prevent or cure.—(1) 
No drug may purport or claim to prevent or cure or may convey to the intending 
user thereof any idea that it may prevent or cure, one or more of the diseases or 
ailments specified in Schedule J. 
(2) No drug may purport or claim to procure or assist to procure, or may 
convey to the intending user thereof any idea that it may procure or assist to 
procure, miscarriage in women. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
529[***]] 
530[PART IXA 
LABELLING AND PACKING OF HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES 
106A. Manner of labelling of Homoeopathic medicines. —(A) Thefollowing 
particulars shall be either printed or written in indelible ink and shall appear in a 
conspicuous manner on the label of the innermost container of any 
Homoeopathic medicine and on every other covering in which the container is 
packed:— 
(i) The words 'Homoeopathic medicine'. 
(ii) The name of the medicine— 
531[(a) For drugs included in the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of 
India or the United States of Amer ica or the United Kingdom, or the 
German Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia, the name specified in that 
Pharmacopoeia.] 
(b) For other drugs, the name descriptive of the true nature of the 
drugs. 
(iii) The potency of the Homoeopathic medicine —For this purpose the 
potency shall be expressed either in decimal, centesimal or millesimal 
systems. 
532[(iiiA) In case of a Homoeopathic medicine containing two or more 
ingredients, the name of each ingredient together with its potency and 
proportion expressed in metric system shall be stated on the label.] 
533[(iv) Name and address of the manufacturer when sold in original 
containers of the manufacturer. In case a Homoeopathic medicine is sold 
in a container other than that of the manufacturer—the name and address 
of the seller:] 
534[Provided that where such medicines are imported, the name and 
address of the importer shall also be mentioned on the label.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(v) In case the Homoeopathic medicine cont ains alcohol, the alcohol 
content in percentage by volume in terms of ethyl alcohol shall be stated 
on the label:] 
535[Provided that in case that the total quantity of the pharmacopoeial 
Homoeopathic medicine in the container is 30 millilitres or less, it will not be 
necessary to state the content of alcohol in the label.] 
(B) In addition to the above particulars the label of a Homoeopathic mother 
tincture shall display the following particulars:— 
(i) a distinctive batch number, t hat is to say, that number by reference to 
which details of manufacture of the particular batch from which the 
substance in the container is taken are recorded and are available for 
inspection, the figures representing the batch number being preceded by 
the words "Batch No." or "Batch" or "Lot Number" or "Lot No." or "Lot" 
or any distinguishing prefix; 
(ii) manufacturing licence number, the number being preceded by the 
words "Manufacturing Licence Number" or "Mfg. Lie No." or "M.L.". 
536[Explanation.—This clause shall not apply to a Homoeopathic mother 
tincture manufactured outside India. 
(C) No Homoeopathic medicine containing a single ingredient shall bear a 
proprietary name on its label.]] 
537[106B. Pr ohibition of quantity and percentage. —No Homoeopathic 
medicine containing more than 12% alcohol v/v (Ethyl Alcohol) shall be packed 
and sold in packing or bottles of more than 30 millilitres, except that it may be 
sold to hospitals/ dispensaries in packing s or bottles of not more than 100 
millilitres.]] 
PART X 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO BIOLOGICAL AND OTHER 
SPECIAL PRODUCTS 
538[107. Name of substance. —If any substance specified in Schedule C is 
advertised or sold as a propriet ary medicine or is contained in a medicine so 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
advertised or sold, the proper name of the substance shall appear on the label in 
the manner prescribed in this Part. 
539[Explanation.—For the purpose of this rule the expression "pro per name" 
means the proper name stated in Schedule F or if no such name is stated, the 
name descriptive of the true nature and origin of the substance: 
Provided that in the case of veterinary biological product the expression 
"proper name" means the proper name stated in Schedule F(l) or if no such 
name is stated, the name or synonym given in the current edition for the t ime 
being of the 540[British Pharmacopoeia (Veterinary)], or, if no such name is 
stated either in Schedule F(l) or the 540[British Pharmacopoeia (Veterinary)], the 
name descriptive of the true nature and origin of the substance approved by the 
licensing authority.]] 
108. Container.—541[(1) No substance specified in Schedule C shall be sold 
or offered for sale unless it has been sealed in a previously sterilised container 
made of glass or any other suitable material approved for the purpose by the 
licensing authority appointed under rule 21, in such manner as may, in the 
opinion of the licensing authority, suffice to preclude the access of bacteria: 
Provided that it shall not be necessary to use a previously sterilised container 
if the filled and sealed container is to be sterilised after the sealing and such 
sterilising procedure would render the products sterile. However, the licensing 
authority may, for any special reasons, direct the licensee to pre -sterilise such 
containers.] 
(2) When any such substance is issued in liquid form in containers which are 
sealed in such a manner that portions of the contents can be withdrawn for use 
on different occasions, the liquid shall contain a sufficient proportion of some 
antiseptic to prevent the growth of any organism which may be accidentally 
introduced in the process of removing a portion of the contents of the container: 
542[Provided that nothing in this sub -rule shall apply to a penicillin 
suspension in oil and wax.] 
543[(3) The container shall comply with such furthe r requirements, if any, as 
are specified in Schedule F or Schedule F(l) as the case may be, in that behalf.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
544[(4) The licensing authority may in the case of particular preparation of 
any such substance dispense with any of the requirements of this rule or of 
Schedule F or Schedule F(l), as the case may be, and may make such additional 
requirement, as having regard to the nature of the preparation, they may deem 
necessary.] 
545[109.Labelling.—(1) The f ollowing particulars and such further 
particulars, if any, as are specified in Schedule F or Schedule F(l), as the case 
may be, shall be printed or written in indelible ink on the label of every phial, 
ampoule or other container of a substance specified in Schedule C and on every 
other covering in which such phial, ampoule or container is packed:— 
(a) Where a drug is imported, the number of licence under which it is 
imported, preceded by the words "Import Licence": 
 Provided that no reference shall be made to any other import licence 
number granted by any authority outside India on any label orcontainer or 
in any covering in which the container is packed or in any other matter of 
advertisement enclosed therein. 
(b) Where a test for potency in units is req uired by these rules, a 
statement of the potency in units defined in terms of relating to the standard 
preparation specified in Schedule F or F(l), as the case may be: 
Provided that this clause shall not apply in the case of vaccine lymph. 
(c) Where a test for potency of maximum toxicity is required the date up 
to which the substance if kept under suitable conditions may be excepted to 
retain a potency not less than that stated on the label of the container or not 
to acquire a toxicity greater than that permitted by the test, as the case may 
be. The date of expiry shall be in terms of month and year and it shall mean 
that the drug is recommended for use till the last day of the month. The 
date of expiry shall be preceded by the words 'Expiry date': 
Provided that nothing in these rules shall be deemed to require the labelling 
of any transparent cover or any wrapper, case or other covering used solely 
for the purpose of packing, transport or delivery. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(2) The particulars prescribed in clause (a) of the pr eceding sub-rule shall 
be printed or written in indelible ink either on the label borne by a container of 
vaccine lymph or on a label or wrapper affixed to any package in which the 
container is issued for sale. The said particulars shall be indelibly marked on the 
sealed container of surgical ligature or suture or printed or written in indelible 
ink on a label enclosed therein. 
(3) The following particulars, and such further particulars, if any, as are 
specified in Schedule F or Schedule F(l), as the cas e may be, shall be printed or 
written in indelible ink either on the label borne by the container of any 
substance specified in Schedule C or on a label or wrapper affixed to any 
package in which any such container is issued for sale, namely:— 
(a) the date on which the manufacture of the particular batch from which 
the substance in the container is taken was completed as defined in 
Schedule F or Schedule F(l) or if there is no definition in Schedule F or F(l) 
as hereafter defined in this rule and in the cas e of vaccine prepared from 
concentrates, the date of completion of the final products and the bottling 
for issue; 
(b) where an antiseptic substance has been added, the nature and the 
percentage proportion introduced; 
(c) the precaution necessary for prese rving the properties of the contents 
up to the date indicated in clause (c) of sub-rule (1) 
(4) For the purpose of clause (a) of sub -rule (3), the date of which the 
manufacture of a batch is completed shall be— 
(a) in cases where a test for potency or toxi city is required, by these rules 
not being so required, is accepted by the licensing authority as sufficient 
for the purpose of fixing the date of completion of manufacture, the date on 
which the substance wras removed from cold storage after having been kept 
at a temperature not exceeding 5°C continuously for a period not exceeding 
two years from the time when the last test was completed; 
(b) in cases where no such test is required or accepted— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(i) if the substance is a serum obtained from a living a nimal, the 
earliest date on which any material contributing to the batch was 
removed from the animal; 
(ii) if the substance was obtained by the growth of organisms on 
artificial media, the earliest date on which growth was terminated in 
any of the material contributing to the batch: 
 Provided that if a batch of the substance (including all material 
contributing to this batch) has for a period of not more than three 
years been kept in cold storage at a temperature not exceeding 5°C 
continuously from the e arliest practicable date after that on which 
growth was terminated in the material as the case may be, the date of 
removal from cold storage shall be treated as the date on which the 
manufacture of the batch is completed; 
(c) in all other cases, the date on which the substance is filled in the 
container.] 
546[109A. Labelling of medical devices.—Subject to the other provisions of 
these rules, the following particulars shall be printed in indelible ink on the label 
or sticker on th e shelf pack of the medical device or on the outer cover of such 
medical device and on every outer covering in which the medical device is 
packed, namely;— 
(a) proper name of the medical device; 
(b) the details necessary for the user to identify the device and its use; 
(c) the name of the manufacturer and address of the manufacturing 
premises where the device has been manufactured; 
(d) the correct statement of the net quantity in terms of weight, measure, 
volume, number of units, as the case may be, and the number of the devices 
contained in the package shall be expressed in metric system; and 
(e) the date of manufacture and date of expiry; alternately the label shall 
bear the shelf life of the product: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
 Provided that in the case of sterile devices the date of sterilisation may be 
given as date of the manufacture of the device: 
 Provided further that the device is made up of stable materials such as 
stainless steel or titanium, and supplied non -sterile, date of expiry may not 
be necessary; 
(f) to provide, whe rever required, an indication that the device contains 
medicinal or biological substance; 
(g) to provide, a distinctive batch number or lot number preceded by the 
word "Lot No." or "Lot" or "Batch No." or "B. No."; 
(h) to indicate, wherever required, any s pecial storage or handling 
conditions applicable to the device; 
(i) to indicate, if the device is supplied as a sterile product, its sterile state 
and the sterilisation method; 
(j) to give, if considered relevant, warnings or precautions for the attention 
of the user of the medical device; 
(k) to label the device, if the device is intended for single use; 
(1) to overprint on the label of the container, the words "FOR CLINICAL 
INVESTIGATION ONLY", if the device is intended for clinical 
investigation; 
(m) to overprint on the label of the device, the words "Physician's 
Sample—Not to be sold", if a medical device is intended for distribution to 
the medical professional as a free sample, 
(n) to provide, except for imported devices, the manufacturing licence 
number by preceding the words "Manufacturing Licence Number" or "Mfg. 
Lie, No." or "M. L"; 
(o) Devices or In-vitro diagnostics which are not sold to customer or patient 
directly and are sold for use by hospitals or diagnostic labs shall provide the 
information affixing additional label or sticker on outer shelf pack; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(p) to provide on the label, in case of imported devices, with the approval of 
the licensing authority mentioned in rule 21, the import licence number, 
name and address of the importer and address o f the actual manufacturing 
premises, date of manufacture, (if not already printed at the time of import): 
Provided that the label may bear symbols recognised by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards or International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) in lieu of text 
and the device safety is not compromised by a lack of understanding on the part 
of the user in case the meaning of the symbol is not obvious to the device user.] 
547[109B. Exemption of certain labelling requirements for medical 
devices for export from India. —The labels on packages or container of 
devices for export shall be adopted to meet specific requirements of the law of 
the country to which the device is to be exported, but the following particulars 
shall appear in conspicuous manner on the label of the shelf pack of the medical 
device in which the device is packed and every other outer covering in which 
the container is packed— 
(a) name of the Device; 
(b) the distinctive batch number or lot number preceded by the wor d "Lot 
No." or "Lot" or "Batch No." or "B. No."; 
(c) the date of expiry, if any; 
(d) the name and address of the manufacturer and address of actual 
premises where the been manufactured; 
(e) the manufacturing Licence No. preceded by the letters "M.L. No" or 
"Manufacturing Licence No"; 
(f) the internationally recognised symbols in lieu of text, wherever required: 
Provided that where a device is required by the consignee not to be labeled 
with the name and address of the manufacturer, the label on the packages or 
container shall bear a code number as approved by the licensing authority and 
the code number shall bear the name of the State or Union territory, in 
abbreviation, followed by the word "Device" and "manufacturing licence 
number: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Provided further that w here a device is required by the consignee not to be 
labeled with the code number also, the label on the packages or container shall 
bear a special code number, as requested by the consignee, and approved by the 
licensing authority under rule 21.] 
548[109C. Shelf life of the medical devices. —The shelf life of the medical 
devices shall not exceed sixty months from the date of manufacture: 
Provide that the period may be extended by the licensing authority in respect 
of any specified medical device, if satisfactory evidence is produced by the 
manufacturer to satisfy such an extension.] 
110. Prohibition of sale of substance after prescribed date. —No person 
shall sell, or exhibit for sale any substance specified in Schedule C after the date 
recorded on the container, label or wrapper as the date up to which the 
substance may be expected to retain a potency not less than, or not to acquire a 
toxicity greater than that required or permitted by the prescribed test as the case 
may be. 
549[***] 
550[111. Standards. —Every substance specified in Schedules C and C(l) 
intended for sale shall conform with the standards of strength, quality and purity 
specified in these rules and in Schedule F or F(l) as the case may be, and the 
tests for determining such conformity shall be applied to samples taken from the 
final product after every manufacturing process has been completed.] 
551[112. Tests for strength and quality. —The t ests, if any, required for 
determining the strength and quality of each of the substances specified in 
Schedules C and C(l) shall be those set out in Schedule F or Schedule F(l) 552[or 
as specified as the case may be].] 
553[***] 
115. Application of tests for sterility.—The tests shall be applied— 
(a) to samples taken from each batch of the substance before the 
operation of filling and sealing the containers in which it is to be issued 
has commenced excep t preparations, which after being sealed in the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
containers are to be sterilized by heat, in a manner satisfactory to the 
licensing authority; and 
(b) to the contents of sample containers when ready for issue. 
554[***] 
119. (1) If at this examination no growth of micro-organisms is found in any 
tube, the sample may be treated as having passed the test. 
 (2) If at the examination a growth of mic ro-organisms is visible, 
furthersamples may be taken and the tests may be repeated on the further 
samples taken; but no container the contents of which form part of the batch 
shall be issued until such further samples have passed the test. The processes of 
taking samples from the batch for a test may be repeated twice: 
 Provided that if the sa me organism is visible in more than one test the 
batchshall be treated as no sterile and the material container in the batch shall 
not be issued or used as part of a further batch unless and until it has been 
resterilized and has passed the tests. 
120. Notwithstanding anything contained in the last preceding rule, in any 
case where— 
(a) a substance is required in any emergency by a registered medical 
practitioner, but the licensee has not filled containers in stock, or 
(b) a substance which in the opinion o f the licensing authority is so 
unstable in solution that the delay occasioned by the completing of the 
sterility test on filled containers would render its issue in active form 
impossible, the licensee may issue the substance from a batch which has 
already passed the test for sterility and freedom from abnormal toxicity, 
without completing the sterility test on the filled containers, provided that 
he complies with the following conditions:— 
(i) the licensee shall before the issue take samples in the requir ed 
proportions from the containers into which the batch is filled, and after 
the required inoculation and incubation shall examine the tubes every 
day for five days; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(ii) if at any examination any growth is visible in any of the tubes, he 
shall immediately notify the licensing authority; 
(iii) he shall keep available for inspection a record of all issues made 
under this Rule containing such particulars of the circumstances in 
which the issue is made as the licensing authority may require. 
555[121.Test for freedom from abnormal toxicity. —The test for freedom 
from abnormal toxicity shall be carried out as per the current edition of Indian 
Pharmacopoeia in the cases of each batch of the serum tested by the licensee or 
by an institution approved by the licensing authority for the purpose of carrying 
out the test on its behalf.] 
556[121A.Test for pyrogens.—Solution of substances intended for parenteral 
administration in large volumes (10 ml. or more at a time) shall be pyrogen-free 
and tested for pyrogens. Ifwater or any other aqueous solvent is supplied along 
with the substances for preparing such solutions, it shall also be pyrogen -free 
and tested for pyrogens.] 
122. Substances specified in Schedule C(l). —The following provisions 
shall apply in the case of a substance specified in Schedule C(l):— 
(a) The container shall comply with the requirements, if any specified in 
Schedule F or Schedule F(l) 557[or as specified] as the case may be. 
558[***] 
(c) The substance shall conform to the standards of strength, quality and purity 
specified in Schedule F or Schedule F(l), 559[or as specified], as the case may be, 
and the tests for determ ining the strength, quality and purity of the substance 
shall be those specified in Schedule F or Schedule F(l) 559[or as specified], as 
the case may be. 
(d) The test for determining the strength, quality and purity of a substanc es 
specified in Schedule F or Schedule F(l) 559[or as specified], as the case may be, 
shall be applied to samples taken from the final product after each 
manufacturing process has been completed. 
(e) The substance should be stored in a cool place and away from light. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
560[PART XA 
IMPORT OR MANUFACTURE OF NEW DRUG FOR CLINICAL 
TRIALS OR MARKETING 
122A. Application for permission to import new drug. —561[(1) (a) No 
newdrug shall be imported except under, and in accordance with the permission 
granted by the Licensing Authority as defined in clause (b) of rule 21. 
(b) An application for grant of permission to import a new drug shall be 
made in Form 44 to the Licensing Authority, accom panied by a fee of 562[two 
lakh fifty thousand rupees]: 
Provided further that where a subsequent application by the same applicant 
for that drug, whether in modified dosage form or with new claims is made, the 
fee to accompany such application shall be 563[one lakh rupees]: 
Provided further that any application received after one year of the grant of 
approval for the import and sale of new drug, shall be accompanied by a fee of 
564[one lakh rupees] and such information and data as required by 565[Appendix 
I or Appendix IA or Appendix IB] of Schedule Y, as the case may be.] 
(2) The importer of a new drug when applying for permission under subrule 
(1), shall submit data as given in 565[Appendix I or Appendix I A or Appendix 
IB] to Schedule Y including the results of local clinical trials carried out in 
accordance with the guidelines specified in that Schedule and submit the repor t 
of such clinical trials in the format given in Appendix II to the said Schedule: 
Provided that the requirement or submitting the results of local clinical trials 
may not be necessary if the drug is of such a nature that the licensing authority 
may, in pu blic interest decide to grant such permission on the basis of data 
available from other countries: 
Provided further that the submission of requirements relating to Animal 
Toxicology Reproduction studies Teratogenic studies, Perinatal studies 
Mutagenicity and Carcinogenicity may be modified or relaxed in case of new 
drugs approved and marketed for several years in other countries if he is 
satisfied that there is adequate published evidence regarding the safety of the 
drug subject to the other provisions of these rules. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
566[(3) The Licensing Authority, after being satisfied that the drug if 
permitted to be imported as raw material (bulk drug substance) or as finished 
formulation shall be effective and safe for use in the country, may issue a n 
import permission in Form 45 and/or Form 45A, subject to the condition stated 
therein: 
Provided that the Licensing Authority shall, where the data provided or 
generated on the drug is inadequate, intimate the applicant in writing and the 
conditions, which shall be satisfied before permission, could be considered.] 
122B. Application for approval to manufacture new drug 567[***].— 
568[(1)(a) No new drug shall be manufactured for sale unless it i s approved by 
the Licensing Authority as defined in clause (b) of rule 21. 
(b) An application for grant of approval to manufacture the new drug and its 
formulations shall be made in Form 44 to the Licensing Authority as defined in 
clause (b) of rule 21 and shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty thousand rupees: 
Provided that where the application is for permission to import a new drug (bulk 
drug substance) and grant of approval to manufacture its formulation/s, the fee 
to accompany such application shall be fifty thousand rupees only. 
Provided further that where a subsequent application by the same applicant 
for that drug, whether in modified dosage form or with new claims, is made, the 
fee to accompany such subsequent application shall be fifteen thousand rupees: 
Provided further also that any application received after one year of the grant 
of approval for the manufacture for sale of the new drug, shall be accompanied 
by a fee of fifteen thousand rupees an such information and data as required by 
565[Appendix I or Appendix IA or Appendix IB] of Schedule Y, as the case may 
be.] 
(2) The manufacturer of a new drug under sub -rule (1) when applying for 
approval to the licensing authority mentioned in the said sub -rule, shall submit 
data as given in 565[Appendix I or Appendix IA or Appendix IB] to Schedule Y 
including the results of clinical trails carried out in the country in accordance 
with the guidelines specified in Schedule Y and submit the report of such 
clinical trials in the format given in Appendix II to the said Schedule. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
569[(2A) The Licensing Authority as defined in clause (b) of rule 21 after 
being satisfied that the drug if approved to be manufacture as raw material (bulk 
drug substance) or as finished formulation shall be effective and safe for use in 
the country, shall issue approval in Form 46 and/or Form 46A., as the case may 
be, subject to the conditions stated therein: 
Provided that the Licensing Authority shall, whe re the data provided or 
generated on the drug is inadequate, intimate the applicant in writing, and the 
conditions, which shall be satisfied before permission could be considered.] 
(3) When applying for approval to manufacture of a new drug under sub-rule 
(1) or its preparations to the State licensing authority an applicant shall produce 
along with his application, evidence that the drug for the manufacture of which 
application is made has already been approve d 570[in the name of the applicant] 
by the licensing authority mentioned in rule 21: 
Provided that the requirement of submitting the results of local clinical trials 
may not be necessary if the drug is of such a nature that the 571[Licensing 
Authority in rule 21] may, in public interest decide to grant such permission on 
the basis of data available from other countries: 
Provided further that the submission of requirements relating to Animal 
Toxicology, Reproduction studies, Teratogenic studies, Perina tal studies, 
Mutagenicity and Carcinogenicity may be modified or relaxed in case of new 
drugs approved and marketed for several years in other countries if he is 
satisfied that there is adequate published evidence regarding the safety of the 
drug, subject to the other provisions of these rules. 
572[***] 
573[122D. Permission to import or manufacture fixed dose combination. 
—(1)An application for permission to import or manufacture fixed dose 
combination of two or more drugs as defined in clause (c) of rule 122E shall be 
made to the Licensing Authority as defined in clause (b) of rule 21 in Form 44, 
accompanied by a fee of 574[fifteen thousand in case of application for 
manufacture of the fixed dose combinations and one lakh rupees in case of 
import application of the fixed dose combinations] and shall be accompanied by 
such information and data as is required in Appendix VI of Schedule Y. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(2) The Licensing Authority after being sa tisfied that the fixed dose 
combination if approved to be imported or manufactured as finished 
formulation shall be effective and safe for use in the country, shall issue 
permission in Form 45 or Form 46, as the case may be, subject to the conditions 
stated therein: 
Provided that the Licensing Authority shall where the data provided or 
generated on the fixed dose combination is inadequate, intimate the applicant in 
writing, and the conditions which shall be satisfied before grant of approval/ 
permission could be considered. 
122DA. Application for permission to conduct clinical trials for New 
Drug/ Investigational New Drug. —(1) No clinical trial for a new drug, 
whether for clinical investigation, or any clinical experiment by any Institution, 
shall be condu cted except under, and in accordance with the permission, in 
writing, of the Licensing Authority defined in clause (b) of rule 21. 
(2) An application for grant of permission to conduct,— 
(a) human clinical trials (Phase -I) on a new drug shall be made to 
theLicensing Authority in Form 44 accompanied by a fee of fifty 
thousand rupees and such information and data as required under 
Schedule Y; 
(b) exploratory clinical trials (Phase -II) on a new drug shall be made on 
the basis of data emerging from Phase -I trial, accompanied by a fee of 
twenty-five thousand rupees; 
(c) confirmatory clinical trials (Phase -III) on a new drug shall be made 
on the basis of the data emerging from Phase -II and where necessary, 
data emerging from Phase -I also, and shall be accompanied by a fee of 
twenty-five thousand rupees. 
Provided that no separate fee snail be required to be paid alongwith 
application for import/manufacture of a new drug based on successful 
completion of phase clinical trials by the apphcant. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Provided further that no fee snail be required to be paid alongwith the 
application by Central Government or State Government Institutes involved in 
clinical research for conducting trials for academic or research purposes. 
(3) The Licensing Authority after being satisfied with the clinical trials, shall 
grant permission in Form 45 or Form 45 A or Form 46 or Form 46A, as the case 
may be, subject to the conditions stated therein: 
Provided that the Licensing Authority shall, where the data provided on the 
clinical trials is inadequate, intimate the apphcant in writing, within six months, 
from the date of such intimation or such extended period, not exceeding a 
further period of six months, as the Licensing Authority may, for reasons to be 
recorded, in writing, permit, intimating the conditions which shall be satisfied 
be fore permission could be considered: 
575[(4) Nopermission for conduct of clinical trial intended for academic 
purposes in respect of approved drug formulation shall be required for any new 
indication or new route of administration or new dose or new dosage form 
where,— 
(a) the trial is approved by the Ethics Committee; and 
(b) subject to the provisions of sub -rule 5, the data generated is not 
intended for submission to licensing authority.] 
576[(5) The Ethics Committee shall however inform the licensing authority 
about the cases approved by it and also about cases where there could be an 
overlap between the clinical trial for academic and regulatory purposes and 
where the said authority does not convey its comments to the Ethics Committee 
within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of communication from 
the Ethics Committee, it shall be presumed that no permission from the 
licensing authority is required.] 
577[Explanation.—For the purpose of these rules,— 
(a) "Clinical Trial" means a systematic study of any new drug(s) in 
human subject(s) to generate data for discovering and/or verifying the 
clinical, pharmacological (including pharmacodynamics and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
pharmacokinetic), and/or adverse effects with the objective of 
determining safety and/or efficacy of the new drug; 
(b) "Global Clinical Trial" means any clinical trial which is conducted as 
part of multi-national clinical development of a drug; 
(c) "Investigational New Drug" means a new chemical entity or a 
product having therapeutic indication but which has never been tested 
earlier on human being; 
(d) "New Chemical Entity" means an active substance in developmental 
stage which may be sp ecified as a drug under the Act, after undergoing 
any clinical trial.] 
578[***] 
579[122DAB. Compensation in case of injury or death during clinical 
trial.—580[(1) In case ot a n injury occurring to the subject during the clinical 
trial, free medical management snail be given as long as required on till such 
time it is established that the injury is not related to the clinical trial, whichever 
is earlier.] 
(2) In case the injury occurring to the trial subject is related to the clinical 
trial, such subject shall also be entitled for financial compensation as per order 
of the Licensing Authority defined under clause (b) of rule 21, and the financial 
compensation will be over and abo ve any expenses incurred on the med ical 
management of the subject. 
581[(2A) In case, there is no permanent injury, the quantum of compensation 
shall be commensurate with the nature of the non -permanent injury and loss of 
wages of the subject.] 
(3) In the case of clinical trial related death of the subject, his/her nominee(s) 
would be entitled for financial compensation, as per the order of the Licensing 
Authority defined under clause (b) of rule 21, and the financial compensation 
will be over and above any expenses incurred on the medical management of 
such subject. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(4) The expenses on medical management and financial compensation in the 
case of clinical trial injury or death of the trial subject shall be borne by the 
sponsor of the clinical trial. 
(5) Any injury or death of the subject occurring in clinical trial due to 
following reasons shall be considered as clinical trial related injury or death and 
the subject or his/her nominee(s), as the case may be, are entitled for financi al 
compensation for such injury or death: 
(a) adverse effect of investigational product(s); 
(b) violation of the approved protocol, scientific misconduct or 
negligence by the Sponsor or his representative or the investigator; 
(c) failure of investigational product to provide intended therapeutic 
effect 1[where, the standard care, though available, was not provided to 
the subject as per the clinical trial protocol]; 
(d) use of placebo in a placebo-controlled trial1 [where, the standard care, 
though available, was not provided to the subject as per the clinical trial 
protocol]; 
(e) adverse effects due to concomitant medication excluding standard 
care, necessitated as part of approved protocol; 
(f) for injury to a child in -utero because of the participation of parent in 
clinical trial; 
(g) any clinical trial procedures involved in the study. 
(6) The Sponsor, whether a pharmaceutical company or an institution shall 
give an undertaking along with the application for clinical trial permission to the 
Licensing Authority defined in clause (b) of Rule 21, to provide compensation 
in the case of clinical trial related injury or death for which subjects are entitled 
to compensation. 
(7) In case the Sponsor fails to provide medical management for the injury to 
the subject and/or financial compensation to the trial subject for clinical trial 
related injury or financial compensation to the subject's nominee(s) in case of 
clinical trial related death of the subject, the Licensing Authority may after 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
giving an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by 
an order in writing, stating the reasons thereof, suspend or cancel the clinical 
"trial and/or restrict Sponsor including his representative(s) to conduct any 
further clinical trials in the country or take any other action deemed fit under the 
rules.] 
582[122DAC. Permission to conduct clinical trial. —(1) The Licensing 
Authority as defined in clause (b) of rule 21, on being satisfied that the data 
submitted along with the applica tion in support of the proposed clinical trial is 
adequate in all respects, issue permission for conduct of clinical trial, subject to 
the following conditions, namely:— 
(a) Clinical trial shall be conducted in compliance with the approved 
protocols, requi rements of Schedule Y annexed to these rules, Good 
Clinical Practice Guidelines for conduct of clinical trials in India and other 
applicable regulations; 
(b) Approval of the Ethics Committee shall be obtained before initiation 
of the study; 
(c) Clinical tr ial shall be registered at Clinical Trials Registry of India 
before enrolling the first patient for the study; 
(d) Annual status report of each clinical trial, as to whether it is ongoing, 
completed or terminated, shall be submitted to the Licensing Author ity, 
and iii case of termination of any clinical trial the detailed reasons for the 
same shall be communicated to the said Licensing Authority; 
(e) Any report of serious adverse event occurring during clinical trial to 
the subject, after due analysis, shal l be forwarded within ten days of its 
occurrence as per Appendix XI and in compliance with the procedures 
prescribed in Schedule Y; 
(f) Incase of an injury or death during the clinical trial to the subject of the 
clinical trial, the apphcant shall provide complete medical management 
and compensation m the case of trial related injury or death in accordance 
with rule 122 DAB and the procedures prescribed under Schedule Y, and 
the details of compensation provided in such cases shall be intimated to 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
the Licensing Authority within thirty days of the receipt of the order of the 
said authority; 
(g) The premises of Sponsor including their employees, subsidiaries and 
branches, their agents, contractors and sub -contractors and clinical trial 
sites shall be open to in spection by the officers authorised by the Central 
Drugs Standard Control Organisation, who may be accompanied by an 
officer of the State Drug Control Authority concerned, to verify 
compliance to the requirements of Schedule Y, Good Clinical Practices 
guidelines for conduct of clinical trials in India and other applicable 
regulations; 
(h) The Sponsor including their employees, subsidiaries and branches, 
their agents, contractors and sub-contractors and clinical trial sites and the 
Investigator shall allow o fficers authorised by the Central Drugs Standard 
Control Organisation, who may be accompanied by an officer of the State 
Drug Control Authority concerned, to enter with or without prior notice, 
any premises of Sponsor including their employees, subsidiarie s and 
branches, their agents, contractors and sub -contractors and clinical trial 
sites to inspect, search and seize, any record, data, document, books, 
investigational drugs, etc. related to clinical trials and provide adequate 
replies to any queries raise d by the inspecting authority in relation to the 
conduct of clinical trial. 
(2) Notwithstanding the conditions specified in sub -rule (1), the Licensing 
Authority, on being satisfied that the data submitted along with the application 
in support of the propo sed clinical trial is adequate in all respect, may also 
impose such additional conditions for issuance of permission in respect of 
specific clinical trials, if considered necessary, regarding the objective, design, 
subject population, subject eligibility, assessments, conduct and treatment of 
such clinical trial. 
(3) If any Sponsor including their employees, subsidiaries and branches, 
their agents, contractors and sub -contractors, Investigators conducting clinical 
trial and clinical trial sites fail to comp ly with any of the above conditions, the 
Licensing Authority, may, after giving an opportunity to show cause why such 
an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the reasons thereof, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) issue warning letter giving details of deficienc y found during the 
inspection, which might affect the right or well -being of the clinical trial 
subject or the validity of the study conducted at that site; 
(b) recommend that study may be rejected or discontinued; 
(c) suspend or cancel the clinical trial permission; 
(d) debar the Investigator(s), Sponsor including their employees, 
subsidiaries and branches, their agents, contractors and subcontractors to 
conduct any clinical trial in future. 
(4) The Sponsor including their employees, subsidiaries and branches, their 
agents, contractors and sub -contractors and clinical trial Investigators, against 
whom action as mentioned in sub -rule (3) has been taken by the Licensing 
Authority, may, within ninety days of the receipt of the copy of the order of t he 
Licensing Authority prefer an appeal to the Central Government, and the 
Central Government may, after giving such appellant an opportunity of being 
heard, confirm, reverse or modify such order.] 
122 DB. Suspension or cancellation of Permission/Approval. —If the 
importer or manufacturer under this Part fails to comply with any of the 
conditions of the permission or approval, the Licensing Authority may, after 
giving an opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by 
an order in writing stating the reasons therefor, suspended or cancel it. 
122DC. Appeal.—Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the 
Licensing Authority under this Part, may within sixty days from the date of such 
order, appeal to the Central Government, and the Central Government may after 
such enquiry into the matter as is considered necessary, may pass such order in 
relation thereto as it thinks fit. 
583[122DD. Registration of ethics Committee. —(1) No Ethics Committee 
shall review and accord i ts approval to a clinical trial protocol without prior 
registration with the Licensing Authority as defined in clause (b) of rule 21: 
Provided that any Ethics Committee, existing on the date of commencement 
of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Third Amendment) Rule s. 2013, who has already 
reviewed and accorded approval to clinical trial protocol, shall obtain 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
registration within a period of forty -five days from the date of commencement 
of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Third Amendment) Rules, 2013. 
(2) An application f or registration of Ethics Committee shall be made to 
the Licensing Authority in accordance with the requirements as specified in the 
Appendix VIII of Schedule Y 
(3) The Licensing Authority after being satisfied that the requirements 
have been complied w ith, may grant registration to the Ethics Committee 
subject to such conditions as may be stated therein. 
(4) The Ethics Committee shall review and accord its approval to a clinical 
trial and also carry ongoing review of the trial at appropriate interval s, as 
specified in Schedule Y, and the Good Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clinical 
Trials in India and other applicable regulatory requirements for safeguarding the 
rights, safety and well-being of the trial subjects. 
(5) In the case of any serious a dverse event occurring to the clinical trial 
subjects during the clinical trial, the Ethics Committee shall analyse and 
forward its opinion as per procedures specified under APPENDIX XII of 
Schedule Y 
(6) The Ethics Committee shall allow inspectors or o fficials authorised by 
the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation to enter its premises to inspect 
anyrecord, data or any document related to clinical trial and provide adequate 
replies to any query raised by such inspectors or officials, as the case may be, in 
relation to the conduct of clinical trial. 
(7) The registration unless it is suspended or cancelled, shall be valid for a 
period of three years from the date of issue; 
Provided that if the application for re -registration is received by the 
Licensing Authority within three months before the expiry, the registration shall 
continue to be in force until orders are passed by the said authority. 
Provided further that the Licensing Authority shall be Informed in writing in 
case of any change in the m embership or the constitution of the Ethics 
Committee takes place. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(8) If the Licensing Authority is not satisfied, he shall reject the 
application and shall inform the applicant of the reasons for such rejection and 
the conditions which must be satisfied before the registration can be granted. 
(9) If the Ethics Committee falls to comply with any of the conditions of 
registration, the Licensing Authority may, after giving an opportunity to show 
cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the 
reasons therefor, suspend or cancel the registration of the Ethics Committee for 
such period as considered necessary. 
(10) The Ethics Committee whose registration has been suspended or 
cancelled by the Licensing Authority, may, w ithin ninety days of the receipt of 
the copy of the order, prefer an appeal to the Central Government and the 
Central Government may after giving an opportunity of being heard, confirm, 
reverse or modify such order. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this rul e an Ethics Committee is a 
committee comprising of medical, scientific, non -medical and non -scientific 
members, whose responsibility is to ensure the protection of the rights, safety 
and wellbeing of human subjects involved in a clinical trial and it shall be 
responsible for reviewing and approving the protocol, the suitability of the 
investigators, facilities, methods and adequacy of information to be used for 
obtaining and documenting informed consent of the study subjects and 
adequacy of confidentiality safeguards.] 
122E. Definition of new drug.—For the purpose of this part, new drug shall 
mean and include— 
584[(a) A drug, as defined in the Act including bulk drugs substance 585[or 
phytopharmaceutical drug] which has not been used in the country to any 
significant extent under the conditions prescribed, recommended or 
suggested in the labelling thereof and h as not been recognised as effective 
and safe by the licensing authority mentioned under rule 21 f or the 
proposed claims: 
Provided that the limited use, if any, has been with the permission of the 
licensing authority.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) A drug already' approved by the licensing authority mentioned inrule 
21 for certain claims, which is now proposed to be marketed with modified 
or new claims, namely, indications, dosage, dosage form (including 
sustained release dosage form) and route of administration. 
(c) A fixed dose combination of two or more drugs, individually 
approved earlier for certain claims, which are now proposed to be 
combined for the first time in a fixed ratio, or if the ratio of ingredients in 
an already marketed combination is proposed to be changed, with certain 
claims, viz., indications dosage, dosage form (including sustained release 
dosage for m) and route of administration. (See items (b) and (c) of 
Appendix VI to Schedule Y). 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this rule— 
586[(i) all vaccines and Recombinant DNA (r-DNA) derived drugs shall be 
new drugs unless certified otherwise by the Licensing Authority under rule 
21;] 
(ii) a new drug shall continue to be considered as new drug for a period of 
four years from the date of its first approval 587[***].] 
588[PART XB 
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE COLLECTION, STORAGE, 
PROCESSING AND DISTRIBUTION OF WHOLE HUMAN BLOOD, 
HUMAN BLOOD COMPONENTS BY 589[BLOOD CENTRES] 590[, 
MANUFACTURE OF BLOOD PRODUCTS AND COLLECTION, 
PROCESSING, TESTING, STORAGE, BANKING AND RELEASE OF 
UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD STEM CELLS] 
591[122EA. Definitions. —(1) In this Part and in the Form contained in 
Schedule A and in Part X1IB 592[Part XIIC and Part XIID] of Schedule F, unless 
there is anything repugnant in the subject of context,— 
(a) apheresis" means the process by which blood drawn from a donor, 
after separating plasma or platelets or leucocytes, is retransfused 
simultaneously into the said donor; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) "autologous blood" means the blood drawn from the patient for 
retransfusion into himself later on; 
(c) "blood" means and includes whole human blood, drawn from a donor 
and mixed with an anti-coagulant; 
593[(d)'Blood Centre' is an author ized premises in an organization or 
institution as the case may be, for carrying out all or any of the operations 
including collection, apheresis, processing, storage and distribution of 
blood drawn from donors or received from another licensed Blood Centr e 
and for preparation, storage and distribution of blood components;] 
(e)"blood component" means a drug prepared, obtained, derived or 
separated from a unit of blood drawn from a donor; 
(f) "blood product" means a drug manufactured or obtained from pooled 
plasma of blood by fractionation, drawn from donors; 
594[(fa)‘cord blood bank' means a place or organization or unit for carrying 
out and responsible for operations of collection, processing, testing, 
banking, selection and release of cord blood units;] 
(g) "donor' means a person who voluntarily donates blood after he has 
been declared fit after a medical examination, for donating blood, on 
fulfilling the criteria given hereinafter, without accepting 595[against 
donated unit] in return any consideration in cash or kind from any source, 
but does not include a professional or a paid donor; 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, benefits or incentives like pins, 
plaques, badges, medals, commendation certificates, time -off from work, 
membership of blood assurance programme, gifts of little or intrinsic monetary 
value shall not be construed as consideration, 
(h) "ieucapheresis" means the process by which the blood drawn from a 
donor, after leucocyte co ncentrates have been separated, is retransfused 
simultaneously into the said donor; 
(i) "plasmapheresis" means the process by which the blood drawn from a 
donor, after plasma has been separated, is re -transfused during the same 
sitting into the said donor; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(j) "plateletpheresis" means the process by which the blood drawn from a 
donor, after platelet concentrates have been separated, is retransfused 
simultaneously into the said donor; 
(k) "professional donor" means a person who donates blood for a valuable 
consideration, in cash or kind, from any source, on behalf of the recipient -
patient and includes a paid donor or a commercial donor; 
(1) "replacement donor" means a donor who is a family friend or a relative 
of the patient recipient.] 
596[(m) 'umbilical cord blood' is the whole blood including Hematopoietic 
Progenitor Cells collected from placental and or Umbilical cord blood 
vessels after the umbilical cord have been clamped.] 
597[(n) 'Erythrocytapheresis' means selective collection of one or two units 
of red cells from a donor or patient using a cell separator and retransfusing 
the remaining blood into the donor or patient.] 
122F. Form of application for licence for operation of 598[Blood Centre]/ 
processing of whole human blood for components/manufacture of blood 
products for sale or distribution 596[, collection, processing, testing, storage, 
banking and release of umbilical cord blood stem cells ],—(1)Application for 
the grant and/or renewal of licence for the operation of a 598[Blood Centre],/ 
processing of human blood for components/manufacture of blood products 596[/ 
Collection, processing, test ing, storage, banking and release of umbilical cord 
blood stem cells] shall be made to the licensing authori ty appointed under Part 
VII in 599[Form 27C 600[, Form 27E or Form 27F], as the case may be,] and shall 
be accompanied by 601[licence fee of rupees six thousand and an inspection fee 
of rupees one thousand and five hundred for every inspection thereof or for the 
purposes of renewal of licence]: 
Provided that if the applic ant applies for renewal of licence after its expiry 
but within six months of such expiry the fee payable for the renewal of the 
licence 601[shall be rupees six thousand and inspection fee of rupees one 
thousand and five hundred p lus an additional fee at the rate of rupees one 
thousand per month or a part thereof in addition to the inspection fee]: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
602[Provided further that a licensee holding a licence in Form 28C, Form 28E 
or Form 28F as the case may be, for operation of 598[Blood Centre]/processing 
of whole human blood for components/manufacture of blood 
products/collection, processing, testing, storage, banking and release of 
umbilical cord blood stem cells shall apply for gra nt of licence under sub -rule 
(1) before the expiry of the said licence on Form 27C, Form 27E or Form 27F 
as the case may be, and he shall continue to operate the same till the orders on 
his application are communicated to him.] 
603[***] 
(2) A fee of rupees 604[one thousand] shall be paid for a duplicate copy of a 
licence issued under this rule, if the original is defaced, damaged or lost. 
(3) Application by a licensee to manufacture additional drug s listed in the 
application shall be accompanied by fee of 605[rupees three hundred] for each 
drug listed in the application. 
(4) On receipt of the application for the grant or renewal of such licence, 
the licensing authority shall,— 
(i) verify the statements made in the application form. 
(ii) cause the manufacturing and testing establishment to be inspected in 
accordance with the provision of rule 12.2-1; and 
(iii) in case the application is for renewal of licence, call for informations 
of past performance of the licensee. 
(5) If the licensing authority is satisfied that the applicant is in a position to 
fulfil the requirements laid down in the rules, he shall prepare a report to that 
effect and forward it 606[alongwith the application and the licence (in triplicate) 
to be granted or renewed, duly completed] to the Central Licence Approving 
Authority: 
Provided that if the licensing authority is of the opinion that the applicant is 
not in a positio n to fulfil the requirements laid down in these rules, he may, by 
order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to grant or renew the licence, 
as the case may be. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(6) If, on receipt of the application and the report of the licensing authority 
referred to in sub -rule 607[(5)] and after taking such measures including 
inspection of the premises, by the Inspector, appointed by the Central 
Government under section 21 of the Act, and/or along with the Expert in the 
field concerned if deemed necessary, the Central Licence Approving Authority, 
is satisfied that the applicant is in a position to fulfil the requirements laid down 
in these rules, he may grant or renew the licence, as the case may be: 
Provided that if the Central Lic ence Approving Authority is of the opinion 
that the applicant is not in a position to fulfil the requirements laid down in 
these rules he may, notwithstanding the report of the licensing authority, by 
order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, reject th e application for grant or 
renewal of licence, as the case may be and shall supply the applicant with a 
copy of the inspection report. 
122G. Form of licence for the operation of a 608[Blood Centre] 
/processing of whole human bloo d for components and 609[/manufacture of 
blood products/ collection, processing, testing, storage, banking and release 
of umbilical cord blood stem cells] and the conditions for the grant or 
renewal of such licence. —610[(1)] A licence for the operation of a 608[Blood 
Centre] or for processing whole human blood for components and 
609[/manufactureof blood products/ collection, processing, testing, stora ge, 
banking and release of umbilical cord blood stem cells] shall be issued in 
611[Form 28C or Form 28E or 612[Form 28F or Form 26G or Form 26 -I or Form 
26], as the case may be, before a licence in Form 28C or Form 28E or Form 28F 
or Form 26G or Form 26 -I or Form 26J], as the case may be] is granted or 
renewed the following conditions shall be complied with by the applicant:— 
613[(i) The operation of Blood Centre or processing or both of whole human 
blood for components shall be conducted under the active direction and 
personal supervision of competent technical staff consisting of at least one 
person who is whole time employee and who is Medical Officer, and 
possessing— 
(a) Degree in Medicine M.B.B.S. having experience of working in Blood 
Centre, not less than one year during regular service and also has adequate 
knowledge and experience in blood group serology, blood group 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
methodology and medical principles involved in the p rocurement of blood 
or preparation of its components or both; or 
(b) Degree in Medicine M.B.B.S. with Diploma in Clinical Pathology or 
Diploma in Pathology and Bacteriology with six months’ experience in a 
licensed Blood Centre; or 
(c) Degree in Medicine M.B.B.S. with Diploma in Transfusion Medicine 
or Diploma in Immunohematology or Blood Transfusion with three 
months’ experience in a licensed Blood Centre; or 
(d) Doctor of Medicine Pathology or Diplomate of National Board 
Pathology with three months’ experience in a licensed Blood Centre; or 
(e) Postgraduate degree in Transfusion Medicine - Doctor of Medicine 
Transfusion Medicine or Diplomate of National Board Transfusion 
Medicine, Doctor of Medicine Immunohematology and Blood 
Transfusion,the degree or diploma being from a University recognized by 
the Central Government or State Government. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this condition, the experience in Blood 
Centre shall not apply in the case of persons who are approved by the Licensing 
Authority or Central Licence Approving Authority or both prior to the 
commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Second Amendment) Rules, 
1999.] 
(ii) The applicant shall provide adequate space, plant and equipment for any 
or all the operations of blood collec tion or blood processing. The space, plant 
and equipment required for various operations is given in Schedule F, Part XIIB 
and/or XIIC 614[or XIID], 
(iii) The applicant shall provide and maintain adequate technical staff as 
specified in Schedule F, Part XIIB and/or XIIC 614[or XIID]. 
(iv) The applicant shall provide adequate arrangements for storage of whole 
human blood, human blood components and blood products. 
(v) The applicant furnish to the licensing authority, if required to do so, data 
on the stability of Whole Human Blood, its components or blood products 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
which are likely to deteriorate, for fixing the date of expiry which shall be 
printed on the labels of such products on the basis of the data so furnished. 
615[(2) Applications for grant or renewal of license for operation of Blood 
Centre or processing of Human blood components shall be made by the Blood 
Centre run by the Government, Indian Red Cross Society, Ho spital, Charitable 
Trust or Voluntary organization and Blood Centre run by Charitable Trust or 
Voluntary organization need to be approved by a State or Union territory Blood 
Transfusion Council as per procedure laid down in this regard by the National 
Blood Transfusion Council. 
Explanation:—For the purpose of this sub -rule, "renewal" shall include 
renewal of any license issued after the commencement of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics (Sixth Amendment) Rules, 2005).] 
122H. Duration of licence. —An original licence in 616[Form 28C or Form 
28E 614[or Form 28F] or a renewed lic ence in Form 26G or Form 26 -I] 617[or 
Form 26J] unless sooner suspended or cancelled shall be 620[valid for a period of 
five years on and from the date on which] it is granted or renewed. 
122-I. Inspection before grant or renewal of licence for operation of 
621[Blood Centre], processing of whole human blood for components and 
manufacture of bl ood products.—Before a licence in 616[Form 28C or Form 
28E 618[or Form 28F] is granted or a renewal of licence in Form 26G or Form 
26-I 619[or Form 26J] is made, as the case may be,] the licensing authority or the 
Central Licence Approving Authority, as the case may be, shall cause the 
establishment in which 621[Blood Centre] is proposed to be operated /whole 
human blood for component is processed 622[/] blood products are manufactured 
to be inspected by one or more inspectors, appointed under the Act and/or 
alongwith the Expert in the field concerned. T he Inspector or Inspectors shall 
examine all portions of the premises and appliances/equipments and inspect the 
process of manu facture intended to be employed or being employed alongwith 
the means to be employed or being employed for operation of 621[Blood 
Centre]/processing of whole human blood for components/manufacture of blood 
products together with their 622[testing] facilities and also enquire into the 
professional qualification of the expert staff and other technical staff to be 
employed. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
122J. Report by Inspector. —The Inspector or Inspectors shall forward a 
detailed descriptive report giving his findings on each aspect of inspection along 
with his recommendation in accordance with the provisions of rule 122 -I to the 
licensing authority or to the Central Licence Approving Authority. 
122K. Further application after rejectio n.—If within a period of six 
months from the rejection of application for a licence the applicant informs the 
licensing authority mat the conditions laid down have been satisf ied and 
deposits an inspection 623[fee of rupees two h undred and fifty] the licensing 
authority may, if after causing further inspection to be made is satisfied that the 
conditions for the 624[grant or renewal of a licence have been complied with, 
shall grant or renew the licence in Form 28C or Form 28E 625[or Form 28F]: 
Provided that in the case of a drug notified by the Central Government under 
rule 68A, the application, together with the inspection report and the Form of 
licence (in triplicate to be gran ted or renewed), duly completed shall be sent, to 
be Central Licence Approving Authority, who may approve the same and return 
it to the licensing authority of issue for the licence.] 
122L. Delegation of powers by the Central Licence Approving 
Authority.— The Central Licence Approving Authority may, with the approval 
of the Central Government, by notification delegate his powers of signing 
licence and any other power under rules to persons under his control having 
same qualifications as prescribed for contro lling authority under rule 50A, for 
such areas and for such periods as may be specified. 
122M. Provision for appeal to the State Government by a party whose 
licence has not been granted or renewed. —Any person who is aggrieved by 
the order passed by the lic ensing authority or Central Licence Approving 
Authority as, the case may be, may within thirty days from the date of receipt of 
such order, appeal to the State Government or Central Government, as the case 
may be, after such enquiry, into the matter as it considers necessary and after 
giving the said person an opportunity for representing his view in the matter 
may pass such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit. 
122N. Additional information to be furnished by an 626[applicant] for 
licence or by a licensee to the licensing authority. —The applicant for the 
grant of licence or any person granted a licence under the Part shall, on demand 
furnish to the licensing authority, before the grant of the licence or during the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
period the licence is in force, as the case may be, documentary evidence in 
respect of the ownership or occupation, rental or other basis of the premises, 
specified in the application for licence or in the licence granted, constitution of 
the firm or any other releva nt matter, which may be required for the purpose of 
verifying the correctness of the statement made by the applicant or the licensee, 
while applying for or after obtaining the licence, as the case may be. 
122-0. Cancellation and suspension of licences. —(1) The licensing 
authority or Central Licence Approving Authority may for such licences granted 
or renewed by him after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause by 
such an order should not be passed by an order in writing stating the reason 
thereof, cancel a licence issued under this part or suspend it for such period as 
he thinks fit, either wholly or in respect of some of the substances to which it 
relates, 627[or direct the licensee to stop collection, storage, processing , 
manufacture and distribution of the said substances and 628[thereupon order the 
destruction of substances and] stocks thereof in the presence of an Inspector] if 
in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the conditions of 
the licence or with any provision of the Act or rules thereunder. 
(2) A licensee whose licence has been suspended or cancelled may, within 
three months of the date of the order under sub -rule (1) prefer an appeal against 
that order to the St ate Government or Central Government, which shall decide 
the same. 
122P. Conditions of licence. —629[A licence in Form 28C, Form 28E, 
630[Form 28F, Form 26G, Form 26 -I or Form 26J shall be subject to the special 
conditions set out in Schedule F, Part XIIB and Part XIIC, Part XIID], as the 
case may be, which relate to the substance in respect of which the licence is 
granted or renewed and to the following general conditions, namely:—] 
(i) (a) The licens ee shall provide and maintain adequate staff, plantand 
premises for the proper operation of a 631[Blood Centre] for processing 
whole human blood, its components and/or manufacture of blood 
products. 
(b) The licensee shall main tain staff, premises and equipment as specified 
in rule 122G. The licensee shall maintain necessary records and 
registers as specified in Schedule F, Part XIIB and XIIC. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(c) The licensee shall test in his own laboratory whole human blood, its 
components and blood products and 632[maintain records and] registers 
in respect of such tests as specified in Schedule F, Parts XIIB and XIIC 
633[or XIID], The records and register shall be maintained for a peri od 
of five years from the date of manufacture. 
(d) The licensee shall maintain/preserve reference 634[sample and] supply 
to the Inspector the reference sample of the whole human blood 
collected by him in an adequate quantity t o conduct all the prescribed 
tests. The licensee shall supply to the Inspector the reference sample for 
the purpose of testing. 
(ii) The licensee shall allow an Inspector appointed under the Act to enter, 
with or 635[without] prior notice, any premises where the activities of the 
631[Blood Centre] are being carried out, for the processing of whole human 
blood and/or blood products, to inspect the premises and plant and the process 
of manufacture and t he mean employed for standardising and testing the 
substance. 
(iii) The licensee shall allow an Inspector appointed under the Act to inspect 
all registers and records maintained under these rules and to take samples of the 
manufactured product and shall supply to Inspector such information as he may 
require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and 
Rules thereunder have been observed. 
(iv) The licensee shall from time to time report to the licensing authority any 
changes in the expert staff responsible for the operation of a 631[Blood 
Centre]/processing of whole human blood for components and/ or manufacture 
of blood products and any material alterations in the premises or plant used for 
that purpose which have been made sin ce the date of last inspection made on 
behalf of the licensing authority before the grant of the licence. 
(v) The licensee shall on request furnish to the licensing authority, or Central 
Licence Approving Authority or to such authority as the licensing authority, or 
the Central Licence Approving Authority may direct, from any batch unit of 
drugs as the licensing authority or Central Licence Approving Authority may 
from time to time specify, sample of such quantity as may be con sidered 
adequate by such Authority for any examination and, if so required, also furnish 
full protocols of the test which have been applied. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(vi) If the licensing authority or the Central Licence Approving Authority so 
directs, the licensee shall not se ll or offer for sale any batch/unit in respect of 
which a sample is, or protocols are furnished under the last preceding sub -
paragraph until a certificate authorising the sales of batch/unit has been issued 
to him by or on behalf of the licensing authority or the Central Licence 
Approving Authority. 
(vii) The licensee shall on being informed by the licensing authority or the 
controlling authority that any part of any batch/unit of the substance has been 
found by the licensing authority or the Central Licence Approving Authority not 
to conform with the standards of strength, quality or purity specified in these 
rules and on being directed so to do, withdraw, from sales and so far as may in 
the particular circumstances of the case be practicable recall all issues already 
made from that batch/unit. 
(viii) No drug manufactured under the licence shall be sold unless the 
precautions necessary for preserving its properties have been observed 
throughout the period after manufacture. Further no batch/ unit manuf actured 
under this licence shall be supplied/distributed to any person without 
prescription of Registered Medical Practitioner. 
(ix) The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act and of these 
rules and with such further requirements, if any, as may be specified in any 
rules subsequently made under Chapter IV of the Act, provided mat where such 
further requirements are specified in the rules, these would come in force four 
months after publication in the Official Gazette.636 
(x) The licensee shall maintain an Inspection Book in Form 35 to enable an 
Inspector to record his impression and defects noticed. 
(xi) The licensee shall destroy the stocks of batch/unit which does not comply 
with standard tests in such a wa y that it would not spread any disease/infection 
by way of proper disinfection method.] 
637[(xii) All bio-medical waste shall be treated, disposed off or destroyed as per 
the provisions of the Bio -Medical Wastes (Management and H andling) Rules, 
1996. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(xiii) The licensee shall neither collect blood from any professional donor or 
paid donor nor shall he prepare blood components and/or manufacture blood 
products from the blood drawn from such a donor.] 
638[(xiv) The whole human blood and blood components may be transferred, 
under prescribed storage conditions, to another blood bank which have facilities 
to store and monitor blood distribution. 
(xv) The recipient 639[blood centres] shall not further transf er units obtained 
from another 640[blood centre] except to another blood storage centre or a 
patient.] 
PART XI 
EXEMPTIONS 
123. The drugs specified in Schedule K shall be exempted from the 
provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the rules made thereunder to the extent 
and subject to the conditions specified in that Schedule. 
PART XU 
STANDARDS 
641[124.Standards of drugs. —(1) Drugs included in the Indian 
Pharmacopoeia: 
(a) The standards for identity, purity and strength shall be those as may be 
specified in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia for the time being in 
force. 
(b) In case the standards for identity, purity and strength for drugs are not 
specified in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia for the time being in 
force but are specified in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia 
immediately preceding, the standards for identity, purity ana strength shall 
be those occurring in such immediately preceding edition of the Indi an 
Pharmacopoeia. 
(2) For other drugs: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) The standards for identity, purity and strength shall be those as may 
be specified in the edition of the official pharmacopoeia, or the time being 
in force, of any country to which the drug claims to comply with. 
(b) In case the standards for identity, purity and strength for drugs are not 
specified in the edition of such official pharmacopoeia, for the time being 
in force, but are specified in the edition immediately preceding, the 
standards for identity, pu rity and strength shall be those occurring in such 
immediately preceding edition of such official pharmacopoeia to which the 
drug claims to comply with. 
(c) For drugs for which standards are not included in the edition of the 
official pharmacopoeia, for the time being in force, of any country or in its 
edition immediately preceding but included in the official compend ia of 
drugs standards, namely:— 
 The British Pharmaceutical Codex or the National Formulary of the 
United States, for the time being i n force, to which the drug claims to 
comply with.] 
642[***] 
643[124B. Standards for patent or proprietary medicines. —The standards 
for patent or proprietary medicines shall be those laid down in Schedul e V and 
such medicines shall also comply with the standards laid down in the Second 
Schedule to the Act.] 
644[124C. Standards for Surgical Dressings. —The standards for Surgica l 
Dressings shall be such as are laid down in Schedule F(II).] 
645[124D. Standards for Sterilised Umbilical tapes. —The standards for 
Sterilised Umbilical tapes shall be as laid down in Schedule F(III).] 
646[125. Standards for substances (other than food) intended to affect the 
structure or any function of human body —Contraceptives.—(1) The 
standards for mechanical contraceptives shall be such as are laid down in 
Schedule R. 
(2) The standards which other contraceptives will have to comply with shall 
be in co nformity with the formulae approved as safe and efficacious by the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Central Government. Such formula shall be displayed on the label of every 
container of such contraceptive.] 
647[125A. Standards for Medical Devices. —The standards for the Medical 
Devices shall be such as are laid down in Schedule Rl.] 
648[126. Standards for substances intended to be used for the destruction 
of vermin or insects which cause 649[***] disease in human beings or 
animals—Disinfectants.—The standards for disinfectants shall be such a s are 
laid down in Schedule O.] 
650[126A.Standards for ophthalmic preparations 651[including 
Homoeopathic ophthalmic preparations].—The standards for ophthalmic 
preparations including Homoeopathic ophthalmic preparations] shall be those 
laid down in Schedule FF, and such preparations shall also comply with the 
standards set out in the Second Schedule to the Act.] 
652[127. List of colours permitted to be used in drugs. —(1) No drug shall 
contain a colour other than that specified below: 
(1) Natural Colours 
Annatto 
Carotene 
Chlorophyll 
Cochineal 
Curcumin 
Red Oxide of iron 
Yellow Oxide of iron 
653[Titanium Oxide] 
654[Black Oxide of Iron] 
655[Titanium dioxide coated mica pearlescent pigments] 
(2) Artificial Colours 
Caramel 
656[Riboflavin] 
(3) Coal Tar Colours 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Common name 
of the Colour 
Colour 
Index 
Number 
Chemical Name 
1 2 3 
GREEN 
Quinazarine 
Green SS 61565 1, 4-bis (p-Toluino)-anthraquinone. 
Alizarin Cyanine 
Green F 61570 Disodium salt of 1, 4-bis(O-sulfo-p-toluino) anthraquinone. 
657[Fast Green 
FCF 42053 
Disodium salt of 4 -{[4-(N-ethyl- p-sulfobenzyl-amino)- 
phenyl-]-(4-hydroxy-2-sulfonium-phenyl) methylene) [1-
N-ethyl-N-p-sulfobenzyl] 1*2, 5, cyclohexa-dienimine] 
658[***] 
YELLOW 
Tartrazine 19140 Trisodium salt of 3-carboxy-5-hydroxy-1- p-sulfophenyl-4-
p sulfophenyl azopyrazole. 
Sunset Yellow 
FCF 15985 Disodium salt of 1 -p sulfophenyl -azo-2-naphthol-6-
sulfonic acid. 
659[Quinoline 
Yellow WS RED 47005 Disodium salt of disulfonic acid of 12 -(2-quinolyl)-l/ 3-
indandione.] 
660[***] 
Erythrosine 45430 Disodium salt of 9 -0-carboxyphenyl -6-hydroxy 2,4,5,7 -
tetraiodo-3-isoxanthone. 
Eosin YS or 
Eosine G 45380 
Disodium salt of 2, 4, 5, 7- 
Tetrabrome-9-p-carboxyphenyl-6- 
hydroxy-3-isoxanthone. 
Toney Red or 
Sudan III 26100 l-p-phenylazophenylazo-2- 
napnthol. 
Ponceau 4 R 16255 Trisodium salt of l-(4-sulpho-l-l- 
napth y lazo)-2-naphthol-6:3-disulphonic acid. 
Carmoisine 

14720 Disodium salt of 2-(4-sulph-l- 
napthylazo)-l-naphthol-4-sulphonic acid. 
660[***] 
1335[Allura Red 16035 Disodium 6 -hydroxy-5-[(2-methoxy-5-methyl-4- 
sulfophenyl)azo]-2-Naphthalenesulfonic acid] 
BLUE 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Indigo Carmine 73015 Disodium salt of indigotin-5:-5 Disulphonic Acid.] 
661[Brillium Blue 
FCF 42090 
 Disodium salt of 4{ [4 -(N-ethyl-p- sulpho-benzylamino-
phenyl-(2-sulphoniumphenyl)-inethylene]-l-(N-ethyl-N-p-
sulfobenzyl)- 2, 5-cyclohexa-dienomine] 
662[***] 
ORANGE 
Orange G 

16230 Disodium salt on l -phenylazo-2-naphthol 6, 8 -disulfonic 
acid. 
BROWN 
Resorcin Brown 20170 Monosodium salt of 4 -p-sulfophenylazo 2 -(2, 4 -xylozo)-l, 
3-resorcinol. 
BLACK 
Naphthol Blue 
Black. 20470 Disodium salt of 8-amino-7-p-nitrophenylazo-2-phenylazo-
naphthol-3,6-disulfonic acid 

(4) Lakes 
The aluminium or calcium salts (lakes) of any of the water -soluble colours 
listed above: 
663[Provided that in case of disinfectants, in addition to the above said colours, 
the colours referred in IS 4707 (Part I) as amended by Bureau of Indian 
Standards from time to time or any of the colours listed in the table below, 
which is non-staining shall be permissible to use. 
Serial 
Number 
Common name of 
colour 
Colour 
Index 
Number 
Chemical name of colour 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1. Guinea Green B 42085 
Monosodium salt of 4-(N-ethyl-
p-sulfobenzylamino)–
diphenylmethylone-(1-(N-ethyl-N-
p-sulfoniumbenzyl)∆ 2,5- 
cyclohexadienimine). 
2. Light Green SF 
Yellowish 42095 
Disodium salt of 4-[4-(N-ethyl-p-
sulfobenzylamine)-phenyl)-4- 
sulphoniumphenyl) methylene]-2(-
(N-ethyl-N-sulfobenzyl) ∆ 2,5-
Cyclohexadienimine. 
3. Tartrazine 19140 Trisodium salt of 3-carboxy-5-

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Serial 
Number 
Common name of 
colour 
Colour 
Index 
Number 
Chemical name of colour 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
hydroxy-1-p-sulfophenyl-4-p- 
sulfophenylazo-pyrazole. 
4. Sunset yellow FCF 15985 
Disodium salt of 1-p-
sulfophenylazo-2- naphthol-6-
sulfonic acid. 
5. 
Ponceau 3R 

16155 
Disodium salts of a mixture of 1-
alkyl- phenylazo-2-napthol 3, 6-
disulfonic acids. 
6. Amarnath. 16185 
Trisodium salt of 1-(4-sulfo-1- 
napthylazo) 2-naphthol 3, 6- 
disulfonic acid. 
7. Erythrosine. 45430 
Disodium salt of 9-0-
carboxyphenyl-6- hydroxy 2,4,5, 7- 
tetraiodo-3- isoxanthone. 
8. Ponceau SX. 14700 
Disodium salt of 2-(5 sulfo-2, 4-
xylyl- azo)-1-naphthol-4- sulfonic 
acid. 
9. Brilliant Blue FCF 42090 
Disodium salt of 4-(9-4-(N-ethyl-p-
sulfobenzylamino)-phenyl)- 2-
sulfonium phenyl)- methylene)-(1-
(N-ethyl-N-p-sulfobenzyl)- 
∆ 2, 5-cyclohexadienimine). 
10. Indigocarmine. 73015 Disodium salt of 5,5‘-
indigotindisulfonic acid. 
11. Wool Violet 5 BN 
(Acid- violet 6B) 42640 
Monosodium salt of 4-(N-ethyl-p-
sulfobenzylamino)-phenyl)-(4- (N-
ethyl-p-(sulfonium-benzylamine)-
phenyl) methylene)-(N, N- dimethyl-
∆ 2,5-cyclohexadienimine) 
12. Light Green SF 
Yellowish 42095 
Calcium salt of 4-(4-(N-ethyl-p-
sulfobenzyl) (minophenyl) 
(4- sulfonium-phenyl)methylene), (1-
(N-ethyl-N-p-sulfobenzyl)- 
∆2,5-cyclohexadienimine). 
13. 

Alizarin Cyanine 
Green F 

61570 

Disodium salt of 1,4-bis (O-sulfo-p-
toluino) anthraquinone 
14. Quinazarine Green 
SS 61565 1,4-bis-(p-Toluino)-anthraquinone 
15. Fast Green FCF 42053 
Disodium salt of 4-(4-(ethyl-p-
sulfobenzylamino)-phenyl) (4- 
hydroxy-2 sulphoniumphenyl) 
methylene)-(1-N-ethyl-N-p- 
sulfobenzyl) ∆ 2, 5, 
cyclohexadienimine). 
16. Acid Fast Green 42100 
Monosodium salt of 4-(4-N-ethyl-p-
sulfobenzylomino) phenyl)- (o-
chlorophenyl)-methylene)- 1-(N-
ethyl-N- p-sulfonium benzyl- ∆ 
2,5, cyclohexadienimine). 
17. Pyranine 59040 Trisodium salt of 10-hydroxy-3,5,8-

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Serial 
Number 
Common name of 
colour 
Colour 
Index 
Number 
Chemical name of colour 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
Concentrated pyrene-trisulfonic Acid 
18. Quinoline Yellow 
WS 47005 Disodium indandione. 
19. Quinoline Yellow 
SS 47000 2-(2-quinolyl)-1, 3 indandiene. 
20. Poneceau 2 R 16150 Disodium salt of 1-xylylazo-2-
naphthol-3, 6-disulfonic acid. 
21. Lithol Rubin B. 15850 Monosodium salt of 4-(o-sulfo-p-
tolylazo)3 hydroxy-2-naphthoic acid. 
22. Lithol Rubin BCA 15850 Calcium salt of 4-(o-sulfo-p-tolylazo)-
3-hydroxy-2-naphthoic acid 
23. Lake Red D. 15500 Monosodium salt of 1-0-
carboxyphenylazo-2-naphthol. 
24. Lake Red DBA 15500 Barium salt of 1-o-carboxyphenylazo-
2-naphthol. 
25. Lake Red DCA. 15500 Calcium salt of 1-o-carboxyphenylazo-
2-naphthol. 
26. Toney Red. 26100 I-p-phenylazophenylazo-2-naphthol. 
27. Oil Red OS. 26125 I-Xylylazoxylylazo-2-napththol 
28. Tetrabromofluoresc
ein 45380 2,4,5,7-Tetrabromo-3, 6-flurandiol. 
29. Eosin TS 45380 
Disodium salt of 2,4,5,7-tetrabromo-9-
0 carboxyphenyl-6- hyroxy-3-
isoxanthone. 
30. Eosin YSK. 45380 
Dipotassium salt of 2,4,5,7-
tetrabromo-9-0 carboxyphenyl-6-
hyroxy-3-isoxanthone 
31. Tetrachlorofluorescein 
NA 45366 2,4,5,7- tetrachloro-S, 6-Fluorandiol 
32. Tetrachlorofluorescein 
K. 45366 
Disodium salt of 9-0-carboxyphenyl-
2,4,5,7-tetrachloro-6- hydroxy-3-
isoxanthone. 
33. 
Tetrachloro 
Tetrabromo 
fluorescein 
45410 2,4,5,7-Tetrabromo-12,13,14,15-
tetrachloro-3, 6-fluorandiol. 
34. Phloxine B 45410 
Disodium salt of 2,4,5,7-tetrabromo-9 
(3,4,5,6-tetra chloro- o-
carboxyphenyl)-6-hydroxy-3-
isoxanthone 
35. Bluish Orange T.R. 45457 1,4,5,8, 15-Pentabromo-2, 7-dicarboxy-
3, 6-fluoran diol. 
36. Helindone Pink CN. 73360 5, 5-Dichloro-3, 3‘ dimethyl-thioindigo 
37. Deep Maroon 
(Fanchon Maroon) 15880 Calcium salt of 4-(I-sulfo-2-
naphthylazo 3- hydroxy-2- naphthoic 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Serial 
Number 
Common name of 
colour 
Colour 
Index 
Number 
Chemical name of colour 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
acid. 
38. Toluidine Red. . 12120 1-(o-Nitro-p-tolylazo)-2-naphthol. 
39. Flaming Red. 12085 I- (o-Chloro-p-nitrophenylazo)-2-
naphthol 
40. Deep Red (Maroon). 12350 3-Hydroxy-N- (m-nitrophenyl)-4-(o-
nitro-p-tolylazo)-2- naphthamide. 
41. Alba Red. 13058 o-(p,β,β-Dihydroxy-diethylamino)-
 phenylazo)-benzoic acid. 
42. Orange G. 16230 Disodium salt of 1-phenylazo-2-
naphthol-6-8-disulfonic acid 
43. Orange II 15510 Monosodium salt of 1-p-
sulfophenylazo-2-naphthol. 
44. Dichlorofluorescein 45365 4,5-Dichloro-3, 6-fluorandiol. 
45. Dichlorofluorescein. 
NA 45365 Disodium salt of 9-o-carboxyphenyl-1-
4,5- dichloro-6- hydroxy-3-isoxanthone 
46. Diiodofluorescein. 45425 4,5 –Diiodo-3, 6-fluorandiol 
47. Erythrosine 
Yellowish NA. 45425 Disodium salt of 9-o-carboxyphenyl-6- 
hydroxy-4, 5- diiodo-3-isoxanthone. 
48. Erythrosine 
Yellowish K. 45425 Dipotassium salt of 9-o-carboxyphenyl-
6-hydroxy-4, 5- diiodo-3-isoxanthone. 
49. Erythrosine 
Yellowish NH 45425 
Dipotassium salt of 9-o-
carboxyphenyl-6-hydroxy-4, 5- diiodo-
3-isoxanthone 
50. Orange TR 45456 4,5, 15-Tribromo 2, 7-dicarboxy-3, 6- 
fluorandiol. 
51. Alizarin. 58000 1,2- Anthraquinonediol. 
52. Dibromodiiodofluore
scein. 45371 4 ,5- Dibromo-2, 7-diiodo-3, 6-
fluorandiol. 
53. Alphazurine FG. 42090 
Diammonium salt of 4-(N-ethyl-p- 
sulfobenzyl amino)- phenyl)-(2-
sulfoniumphenyl)-Methytlene)-(-(1 (N-
ethyl-N- p-sulfobenzyl) ∆ 2 ,5-
cyclohexadienimine). 
54. Allarin Astrol B. 61530 Monosodium salt of 1-methylamino-4-
(o-sulfo-p-toluino)- anthroquinone. 
55. Indigo. 73000 Indigotin. 
56. Patent Blue NA. 42052 
Monosodium salt of 4-(4- (N-ethyl- 
benzyl-amino)-phenyl – (5-hydroxy-4-
sulfo-2-sulfoniumphenyl-
methylene)(N-ethyl- Benzyl- ∆ 2, 5-
cyclohexadienimine). 
57. Patent Blue CA. 42052 Calcium salt of 4-(4- (N-ethyl- benzyl-
amino)-phenyl)-(5 hydroxy-4-sulfo-2-

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Serial 
Number 
Common name of 
colour 
Colour 
Index 
Number 
Chemical name of colour 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
sulfoniumphenyl, methylene)- (N-
ethyl- 
N-benzyl- ∆ 2- 5-cyclohexadienimine). 
58. Carbrantherene Blue 69825 3, 3- Dichloroindanthrene. 
59. Napthol Blue Black 
 20470 
Disodium salt of 8-amino-7-p- 
nitrophenylazo 3- phenylazo-1- 
naphthol-3, 6-disulfonic acid 
60. Alizurol purple SS 60725 I-hydroxy-4-p-toluino-anthraquinone. 
61. Acid Red 89 23910 ---- 
62. Acid Red 97 22890 ---- 
63. Acid Blue 1 42045 ---- 
64. Food Blue 3 42045 ---- 
65. Natural Orange 75480 ---- 
66. Solvent Blues 4 44045 ---- 
67. Solvent Yellow 18 12740 ---- 
68. Food Yellow 12. 12740 ---- 
69. Solvent Yellow 32. 48045 ---- 
70. Fanchon Yellow 
(Hansa Yellow G). 11680 (α) -(O-Nitro-p-tolylazo) 
accetoacetanilide ] 
(2) The label on the container of a drug containing a permitted colour shall 
indicate the common name of the colour 664[except gelatine capsu les wherein 
approved or permitted colour shall be used].] 
128. The following rules are hereby repealed except as respects things 
done or omitted to be done under those rules, namely:— 
Andhra Pradesh Drugs Rules, 1945. 
Assam Drugs Rules, 1945. 
Bihar Drugs Rules, 1945. 
Bombay Drugs Rules, 1946. 
East Punjab Drugs Rules, 1945. 
C.P. & Berar Drugs Rules, 1945. 
Madras Drugs Rules, 1945. 
Orissa Drugs Rules, 1945. 
Rajasthan Drugs Rules, 1953. 
Saurashtra Drugs Rules, 1953. 
Travancore-Cochin Drugs Rules, 1953. 
United Provinces Drugs Rules, 1945. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
West Bengal Drugs Rules, 1946. 
665[Mysore Drugs Rules, 1954.] 

PART XIII 
666 [***] 
PART XIV 
667[***] 

PART XV 
668[***] 

669[PART XV(A) 
APPROVAL OF INSTITUTIONS FOR CARRYING OUT TESTS ON 
DRUGS, 670[***] AND RAW MATERIALS USED IN THEIR 
MANUFACTURE ON BEHALF OF LICENSEES FOR MANUFACTURE 
FOR SALE OF DRUGS/ 674[***] 671[OR AN INDIVIDUAL OR 
ORGANISATION OR PROCUREMENT AGENCY] 
150B. Application for grant of approval for testing drugs/ 672[***].—(1) 
Application for grant 673[***] of approval for carrying out tests for identity, 
purity, quality and strength of drags 674[***] or the raw materials used in the 
manufacture thereof on behalf of licensees for manufacture 675[for sale of drugs 
676[***] or an individual or organisation or procurement agency shall be made in 
Form 36] to the licensing authority appointed by the State Government for the 
purposes of Part VII, VII(A) or XIV of these rules, as the case may be and 
referred to as the "approving authority" under this Part and shall be 
accompanied by an inspection fee of 678[rupees six thousand] in the case of 
testing of drugs specified in Schedules C and C (1) and 678[rupees one thousand 
and five hundred] in the case of testing of drugs other than those specified in 
Schedules C and C (1), homoeopathic drugs 676[***]: 
 Provided that the applicant shall furnish to the app roving authority such 
additional information as may be required by him in connection with the 
application in Form 36: 
677[***]: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
679[(2) A separate application shall be made for grant of approval for 
carrying out tests on additional categories of drugs or items of 680[***] and shall 
be accompanied by an inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred 
in the case of drugs specified in Schedule C and Schedule C(l) and rupee s one 
thousand each in case of drugs other than those specified in Schedule C and 
Schedule C(l). Homoeopathic medicines 681[***]. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this Part, the words 'drugs' 3[***] shall 
also mean and include raw materials used in the manufacture of drugs including 
homoeopathic drugs 682[***], as the case may be.] 
150C. Form in which approval to be granted for carrying out tests on 
drugs/ 680[***] on behalf of licensees for manufacture of drugs/ 680[***] 
683[or for an individual or organisation or procurement agency] and 
conditions for grant 684[***]of such approval.—(1) Approval for carrying out 
such tests of identity, purity, quality and strength of drugs 685[***] required 
under the provisions of these rules, on behalf of licensee for manufacture of 
drugs 682[***]683[or an individual or organisation or procurement agency] shall 
be granted in Form 37. 
(2) Before approval in Form 37 is granted 686[***], the following conditions 
shall be complied with by the applicant:— 
(1) The premises where the tests are being carried on shall be well 
lighted and properly ventilated except where the nature of tests of any 
drug 682[***] warrants otherwise. Whenever necessary, the premises 
shall be air-conditioned so as to maintain the accuracy and functioning of 
laboratory instruments or to enable the performance of special tests such 
as sterility tests, microbiological tests, etc. 
(2) The applicant shall provide adequate space having regard to the 
nature and number of samples of drugs 682[***] proposed to be tested: 
Provided that the approving authority shall determine from time to time 
whether the space provided continues to be adequate. 
(3) If it is intended to carry out test requiri ng the use of animals, the 
applicant shall provide for an animal house and comply with the 
following requirements: — 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) The animal house shall be adequate in area, well lighted and 
properly ventilated and the animals undergoing tests shall be kept in 
air-conditioned area. 
(b) The animals shall be suitably housed in hygienic surroundings 
and necessary provision made for removal of excreta and foul 
smell. 
(c) The applicant shall provide for suitable arrangements for 
preparation of animal feed. 
(d) The applicant shall provide for suitable arrangements for 
quarantining of all animals immediately on their receipt in the 
institution. 
(e) The animals shall be periodically examined for their physical 
fitness. 
(f) The applicant shall provide for is olation of sick animals as 
well as animals under test. 
(g) The applicant shal l ensure compliance with the requirements 
ofthe Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 (59 of 1960). 
(h) The applicant sh all make proper arrangements for the 
disposalof the carcasses o f animals in a manner as not to cause 
hazardto public health. 
(4) The applicant shall provide and maintain suitable equipment having 
regard to the nature and number of samp les of drugs 687[***] intended to 
be te sted which shall be adequate in the opinion of the approving 
authority. 
(5) The testing of drugs 688[***], shall be under the active direction of a 
person whose qualifications and experience are considered adequate in 
the opinion of the approving authority and who shall be held responsible 
for the reports of test or analysis issued by the applicant. 
(6) The testing of drugs 688[***], for identity, purity, quality and 
strengthshall be carried out by persons whose qualificatio ns and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
experience of testing are adequate in the opinion of the approving 
authority. 
(7) The applicant shall provide books of standard recognised under the 
provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder and such books of 
reference as may be required in connection with the testing or analysis of 
the products for the testing of which approval is applied for. 
689[150D. Duration of approval.—(1) A licence issued under Form 37 shall 
remain valid if th e licencee deposits a licence retention fee referred to in sub -
rule (2) before the expiry of period of every succeeding five years from the date 
ofits issue, unless, it is suspended or cancelled by the licensing authority. 
(2) The licence retention fee ref erred to in sub-rule (1) shall be equivalent to 
the respective fee required for the grant of such licence. 
(3) If the licence holder fails to pay licence retention fee on or before the due 
date as referred to in sub -rule (1), he shall be liable to pay lice nce retention fee 
along with a late fee calculated at the rate of two per cent, of the licence fee for 
every month or part thereof up to six months, and in the event of non -payment 
of such fee, the licence shall be deemed to have been cancelled.] 
150E.Conditions of approval.—An approval in Form 37 shall be subject to 
the following general conditions:— 
(a) The institution granted approval under this Part (hereinafter referred 
to as the approved institution) shall provide and maintain an adequate staff 
and adequate premises and equipment as specified in rule 150C 690[and 
Schedule L-l]. 
(b) The approved institution shall provide proper facilities for storage so 
as to preserve the properties of the samples to be tested by it. 
(c) The approved institution shall maintain records of tests for identity, 
purity, quality and strength carried out on all samples of drugs, 691[***] 
and the results thereof together with the protocols of tests showing the 
readings and calculation in such form as to be available for inspection and 
such records shall be retained in the case of substances for which an expiry 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
date is assigned for a period of two years from the expiry of such date and 
in the case of other substances for a period of six years. 
(d) The approved institution shall allow the Inspector appointed under 
this Act to enter with or without prior notice the premises where the 
testing is carried on and to inspect the premises and the equipment used 
for test and the testing procedures employed. The institution shall allow 
the Inspectors to inspect the registers and records maintained under these 
rules and shall supply to such Inspectors such information as they may 
require for the purpose of ascertaining whether t he provisions of the Act 
and rules made thereunder have been observed. 
(e) The approved institution shall from time to time report to the 
approving authority any changes in the person -in-charge of testing of 
drugs 691[***] or in the expert staff responsible for testing as the case may 
be and any material alterations in the premises or changes in the 
equipment used for the purposes of testing which have been made since 
the date of last inspection made on behalf of the approving au thority 
before the grant 692[***] of approval. 
693[(f) The approved institution shall furnish reports of the results of test or 
analysis on the samples received from manufacturer in Form 39 and from 
an individual or organisation or procurement agency in Form 39A.] 
(g) In case any sample of a drug 694[***] is found on test to be not of 
standard quality, the approved institution shall furnish the approving 
authority 695[and the licensing authority of the State where the 
manufacturer and/or sender of the drug 691[***] is located] with a copy of 
the test report on the sample with the protocols of tests applied. 
(h) The approved institution shall comply with the provisions of the Act 
and rules made thereunder and with such further requirements, if any, as 
may be specified in the rules subsequently made under Chapter IV of the 
Act of which the approving authority has given the approved institution 
not less than four months' notice. 
(i) The approved institution shall maintain an Inspection Book to enable 
the Inspector to record his impressions or defects noticed. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
150F. Inspection before grant of approval. —Before an approval i n Form 
37 is granted, the approving authority shall cause the institution at which the 
testing of drugs 696[***] is proposed to be earned out to be inspected jointly by 
the Drugs Inspectors of the Central Drugs Standard Control O rganisation and 
the State Drugs Control Organisation who shall examine the premises and the 
equipment intended to be used for testing of drugs 697[***] and inquire into the 
professional qualifications of the expert staff to be employed. 
150G. Report of Inspection.—The Drugs Inspector mentioned in rule 150F 
shall forward to the approving authority a detailed report of the results of the 
inspection. 
150H. Procedure of approving authority. —(1) If the approving authority 
after such further enquiry, if any, as he may consider necessary, is satisfied that 
the requirements of the rules made under the Act have been complied with and 
that the conditions of the approval and the rules made under the Act will be 
observed, he shall grant an approval in Form 37. 
(2) If the approving authority is not so satisfied, he shall reject the 
application and shall inform the applicant of the reasons for such rejection and 
of the conditions which must be satisfied before an approval could be granted. 
150-I. Further application after rejection. —If within a period of six 
months from the rejection of an application for approval, the applicant informs 
the approving authority that the conditions laid down have been satisfied and 
deposits inspection fee of 698[rupees two hundred and fifty], the approving 
authority may, if, after causing a further inspection to be made, he is satisfied 
that the conditions for grant of approval have been complied with, grant the 
approval in Form 37. 
150-J. 699[***] 
150K. Withdrawal and suspension of approvals. —(1) The approving 
authority may, after giving the approved institution an opportunity to show 
cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the 
reasons therefore, withdraw an approval granted under this Part or suspend it for 
such period as he thinks fit either wholly or in respect of some of the categories 
of drugs 700[***] to which it relates, if in his opinion the ap proved institution 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
had failed to comply with any of the conditions of the approval or with any 
provision of the Act or the rules made thereunder. 
(2) Any approved institution whose approval has been suspended or 
withdrawn may within three months of the dat e of the order, appeal to the State 
Government which shall dispose of the appeal in consultation with a panel of 
competent persons appointed by it in this behalf and notified in the Official 
Gazette.] 
701[PART XVI 
MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OF AYURVEDIC 
 702[SIDDHA] OR UNANI DRUGS 
151. Manufacture on more than one set of premises. —If Ayurvedic 
703[Siddha] or Unani drugs are manufactured on more than one set of premises, 
a separate application shall be made and a separate licence shall be obtained in 
respect of each such set of premises. 
152. Licensing authorities. —-For the purpose of this Part the State 
Government shall appoint such licensing authorities and for such areas as may 
be specified in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette. 
704[153. Application for licence to manufacture Ayurvedic, Siddha or 
Unani drugs.—(1) An application for the grant of licence to manufacture for 
sale of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, shall be made— 
(a) as defined under clause (a) of section 3 of the Act, in Form 24D to 
the licensing authority alongwith a fee of rupees two thousand; and 
(b) as defined in sub-clause (i) of clause (h) of section 3 of the Act, in 
Form 24D to the licensing authority alongwith a fee of mpees three 
thousand for the first ten products and after the said ten products, an 
additional fee of rupees two thousand per product, through the portal e-
AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in ) as per the format provided in 
the said portal, pertaining to the licence for manufacture for sale of 
Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs. 
Provided that this rule shall not be applicable to licence obtained under Form 
25D prior to the date of commencement of the Drugs (4th Amendment) Rules, 
2021 and such licence holder having a Good Manufacturing Practices 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Certificate on the date of its renewal has to deposit a onetime licence retention 
fee of rupees one thousand for existing licenced drugs falling under clause (a) of 
section 3 of the Act; and rupees one thousand for first ten products and a fee at 
the rate of rupees one thousand per product over and above the said first ten 
products for existing licenced drugs falling under s ub-clause (i) of clause (h) of 
section 3 of the Act. 
Provided further that till the portal e -AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in) 
shall come to effect 1343.[within twenty four months] of the commencement of 
the Drugs (4th Amendment) Rules, 2021 and during this period either of online 
and offline process of licence application shall be accepted.] 
705[153A.Application for loan licence to manufacture Ayurvedic, Siddha 
or Unani drugs.—(1) An application for grant of a loan licence to manufacture 
for sale of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, shall be made— 
(a) as defined under clause (a) of section 3 of the Act, in Form 24E to 
the licensing authority alongwith a fee of rupees two thousand; and 
(b) as defined in sub -clause (i) of clause (h) of section 3 of the Act, in 
Form 24E to the licensing authority alongwith a fee of rupees three 
thousand for the first ten products and after the said te n products, an 
additional fee of rupees two thousand per product, through the portal e-
AUSHADHI ( www.e-aushadhi.gov.in) as per the format provided in 
the said portal, pertaining to the loan licence for manufacture for sale 
of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs: 
Provided that this rule shall not be applicable to licence obtained under Form 
25E prior to the date of commencement of the Drags (4th Amendment) Rules, 
2021 and such licence holder having a Good Manufacturing Practices 
Certificate of the manufacturing facilitieshe intends to avail on the date of 
renewal of its licence has to deposit a onetime licenceretention fee of rupees one 
thousand for existing licenced drags falling under clause (a) of section 3 of the 
Act; and rupees one thousand for first ten products and a fee at the rate of 
rupees one thousand per product over and above the said first ten products for 
existing licenced drags falling under sub clause (i) of clause (h) of section 3 of 
the Act. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Provided further that till the portal e -AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in) 
shall come to effect 1343.[within twenty four months] of the commencement of 
the Drugs (4th Amendment) Rules, 2021 and during this period either of online 
and offline process of licence application shall be accepted. 
Explanation—For the purposes of this rule, a "loan licence" means a licence 
issued by the Licensing Authority to an applicant who does not have his own 
arrangements for manufacture but intends to avail himself of the manufacturing 
facilities owned by a licencee in Form 25D. 
153B. Application for Certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices for 
Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs manufacturing unit. —(1) An application 
for the grant of a Certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices for Ayurvedic, 
Siddha or Unani drugs manufacturing unit shall be made in Form 24E-1 to the 
licensing authority along with a fee of rupees five thousand. 
(2) Every application in Form 24E-1 shall be made for a unit having 
premises and other requirements as prescribed under Schedule T. 
(3) The application shall be made through portal e -AUSHADHI (www.e-
aushadhi.gov.in ) as per the format pro vided in the said portal, pertaining to the 
Good Manufacturing Practices for Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs 
manufacturing units.] 
706[154.Form of licence to manufacture Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani 
drugs.—(1) Subject to the condi tions of rule 157 being fulfilled, a licence to 
manufacture for sale of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drags shall be issued in 
Form 25D within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the 
application or from the date of compliance by the applica nt of shortcomings, if 
any, highlighted by the licensing authority, as the case may be. 
(2) A licence under this rule shall be granted by the licensing authority 
after consulting such expert in Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Systems of 
medicine, as the case may be, which the State Government may approve in this 
behalf. 
(3) The application shall be processed through portal e -AUSHADHI 
(www.e-ajshadhi.gov.in) and the licence in Form 25D shall be issued online as 
per the format provided in the said portal.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
707[154A. Form of loan licence to manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic, 
Siddha or Unani drugs. —(1) A loan licence to manufacture for sale of any 
Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs shall be issued in Form 25E within a period 
of two mont hs from the date of receipt of the application or from the date of 
compliance of shortcomings, if any, highlighted by the licensing authority, as 
the case may be. 
(2) A licence under this rule shall be granted by the Licensing Authority 
after consulting such expert in Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani systems of 
medicine, as the case may be, which the State Government may approve in this 
behalf. 
(3) The Licensing Authority after being satisfied that the manufacturing 
unit licenced under Form 25D has adequate equipment, staff and capacity for 
manufacture and facilities for testing, to undertake the manufacture on behalf of 
the applicant for a loan licence shall grant a loan licence. 
(4) The application shall be processed through portal e -AUSHADHI 
(www.e-aushadhi.gov.in) and licence in Form 25E shall be issued online as per 
the format provided in the said portal.] 
155. 708[***] 
155A. 709[***] 
710[155B. Certificate of award of Goo d Manufacturing Practices 
Ayurveda, Siddha and Uriani Drugs. —711[(1)] The certificate of Good 
Manufacturing Practices (GMP) to manufacturers of Ayurved -Siddha or Unani 
drugs shall be issued 712[in Form 26E-1] to licensee who comply with the 
requirements of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) of Ayurveda, Siddha and 
Unani drugs as laid down Schedule T.] 
(2) 713[***] 
714[156. Duration of licence. —(1) A li cence issued in Form 25D shall 
remain valid perpetually: 
Provided that the licencee shall submit a self-declaration of adherence to the 
conditions of licence and the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
rules made thereunder, every year from t he date of issue of licence in Form 25 
D or from the date of submission of last self-declaration, as the case may be: 
Provided further that such self-declaration shall be made within three 
months, of completion of one year from the date of issue of licence in form 25 
D or from the date of submission of last self-declaration, as the case may be, 
and in the event of non-submission of such self-declaration, within the time 
mentioned in the licence of the said product shall be suspended temporarily and 
if the licensee fails to submit the self-declaration within a further period of three 
months, the licence of the said product shall be deemed to have been cancelled.] 
715[156A. Duration of loan licence. —A loan licence issued in Form 25E 
shall remain valid perpetually: 
Provided that the licencee shall submit a self-declaration of adherence to the 
conditions of licence and the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and the 
rules made thereunder, every year from the date of issue of licence in form 25 E 
or from the date of submission of last self-declaration, as the case may be. 
Provided further that such self-declaration shall be made within three 
months, of completion of one year from the date of issue of licence in form 25 E 
or from the date of submission of last self-declaration, as the case may be, and 
in the event of non-submission of such self-declaration, within the time 
mentioned in the Licence of the said product shall be suspended temporarily and 
if the licensee fails to submit the self-declaration within a further period of three 
months, the licence of the said product shall be deemed to have been cancelled. 
156B. Duration of Certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices for 
Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs manufacturing units —(1) A certificate 
issued in form 26E -1 shall remain valid unless it is cancelled by the Licensing 
Authority subject to deposit of a certificate retention fee of rupees one thousand 
before the expiry of a period of every succeeding five years from the date of i ts 
issue. 
(2) If the licencee fails to pay certificate retention fee on or before the due 
date as referred to in sub -rule (1), he shall be liable to pay certificate retention 
fee alongwith a late fee calculated at the rate of two per cent of the certificat e 
retention fee for every month or part thereof up to six months, and in the event 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
of non -payment of such fee, the certificate shall be deemed to have been 
cancelled. 
156C.Inspection for grant of licence and verification of compliance. —
(1) Before a certifi cate in Form 26E -1 is granted, the licensing authority shall 
cause the establishment in which the manufacture of drugs is proposed to be 
conducted or being conducted to be inspected by one or more inspectors 
appointed by the State Government under this Act , with or without an expert in 
the field concerned and the inspector or inspectors shall examine the 
establishment intended to be used or being used for the manufacture of drugs. 
(2) The inspectors shall verify the self-declaration of adherence to the 
conditions of licence and the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and the 
Drugs Rules once in five years or as needed as per risk based approach. 
Provided that the inspectors are allotted the inspection duty in a randomized 
manner ensuring that the same inspector is not assigned inspection of a 
particular establishment consecutively for two terms of not less than five years’ 
duration. 
Provided further that if the premises is not inspected within the period of the 
validity of the GMP certificate or even af ter submission of retention fee, the 
GMP certificate shall be deemed to be continued for further term of five years. 
156D. Report by Inspector.—(1) The Inspector or Inspectors shall examine 
all areas of the premises, plant and appliances and also inspect t he process of 
manufacture intended to be employed or being employed along with the means 
to be employed or being employed for standardizing and testing the drugs to be 
manufactured or being manufactured and enquire into the professional 
qualifications of t he technical staff to be employed and he shall also examine 
and verify the statements made in the application in regard to their correctness, 
and the capability of the applicant to comply with the requirements of 
competent technical staff, manufacturing pl ants, testing equipments and the 
Requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices and Plant and Equipments as 
laid down in Schedule T. 
(2) The Inspector after completion of his inspection shall forward a detailed 
report giving his findings on each aspect of in spection alongwith his 
recommendations, to the Licensing Authority. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
156E. Procedure of Licensing Authority. —(1) If the Licensing Authority 
after such further enquiry, if any, as he may consider necessary, and after being 
satisfied that the requirements of the provisions referred to in the rules under the 
Act have been complied with and that the conditions of the licence shall be 
observed, shall issue a licence under this Part. 
(2) If the Licensing Authority is not satisfied of the requirements under 
sub-rule (l), shall issue a memorandum of shortcoming, and the conditions 
which shall be satisfied before a licence is granted and shall supply the 
applicant a copy of the inspection report. 
(3) The applicant within two months of issue of such memorandum un der 
sub-rule (2) shall reply the same. 
(4) On non-submission of requirements under sub -rule (2), the Licensing 
Authority shall reject the application and shall inform the applicant, the reasons 
for such rejection. 
(5) For this purpose, the licensing authority shall intimate the applicant and 
process the application through portal e-AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in). 
156F. Further application after rejection. —If the applicant, within a 
period of six months from the rejection of an application for a licence or 
Certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices, as the case may be, informs the 
Licensing Authority that the conditions laid down have been complied with and 
deposit an inspection fee of rupees one thousand, t he Licensing Authority may, 
after a further inspection, if any, is satisfied that the conditions for the grant of a 
licence or certificate have been complied with, issue a licence or certificate 
under thus Part.] 
157. Conditions for the grant 716[***] of a licence in Form 25D. —Before 
a licence in Form 25D is granted 717[***], the following conditions sh all be 
complied with by the applicant, namely:— 
(1) The manufacture of Ayurvedic 718[Siddha] or Unani d rugs shall be 
carried out in such premises and under such hygienic conditions as are 
specified in Schedule T. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
719[(1A) For issuing of the certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices, the 
Licensing Authority shall verify the requi rements as per Schedule T and 
issue the Good Manufacturing Practices certificate in Form 26E -I, 
simultaneously along with grant 720[***] of Licence in Form 25D.] 
721[(1B) No manufacturer shall use any p refix or suffix with the name of 
any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Tibb drug falling under clause (a) of 
section 3 of the Act, except as described in the authoritative books specified 
in the First Schedule to the Act: 
Provided that a formulation without any s pecific name, described in the 
authoritative books may be named on the basis of the ingredients of that 
formulation.] 
(1C) The name of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Tibb drug falling under 
clause (a) of section 3 of the Act shall not be used for naming an y patent or 
proprietary medicine relating to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Tibb systems 
of medicine referred to in sub-clause(i) of clause (h) of the said section: 
Provided that this rule shall not be applicable for single plant -ingredient 
based Ayurvedic, Si ddha or Unani Tibb formulation Licensed or to be 
Licensed as patent or proprietary medicine under sub -clause (i) of clause 
(h) of section 3 of the Act. 
722[(1D) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -rules (IB) and (1C) 
shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of the Act.] 
(1E) 723[***] 
(2) The manufacture of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs shall be 
conducted under the direction and supervision of competent technical staff 
consisting at least of one person, who is a whole -time employee and who 
possesses the following qualification, namely:— 
(a) a degree in Ayurveda or Ayurvedic Pharmacy, Siddha or Unani 
system of medicine, as the case may be, conferred by a University, a State 
Government or Statutory Faculties, Councils and Boards of Indian 
Systems of Medicine recognised by the Central Government or a State 
Government for this purpose, or 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) a diploma in Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani system of medicine granted 
by a State G overnment or an Institution recognised by the Central 
Government for this purpose, or 
(c) a graduate in Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry or Chemistry 
or Botany or a University recognised by the Central Government with 
experience of at least two year s in the manufacture of drugs pertaining to 
the Ayurvedic or Siddha or Unani system of medicine, or 
(d) a Vaid or Hakim registered in a State Register of Practitioners of 
indigenous system of medicines having experience of at least four years in 
the manufacture of Siddha or Unani drugs, or 
(e) a qualification as Pharmacist in Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or 
Unani systems of medicine, possessing experience of not less than eight 
years in the manufacture of Ayurvedic or Siddha or Unani drugs as may 
be recognised by the Central Government. 
(3) The competent technical staff to direct and supervise the manufacture of 
Ayurvedic drugs shall have qualifications in Ayurveda and the competent 
technical staff to direct and supervise the manufacture of Siddha d rugs and 
Unani drugs shall have qualifications in Siddha or Unani, as the case may be. 
724[157A. Maintaining of records of raw material used by licensed 
manufacturing unit of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs in the preceding 
financial year. —Each licensed manufacturing unit of Ayurveda or Siddha or 
Unani drugs shall keep a record of raw material used by each licensed 
manufacturing unit of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs, as the case may be, in 
the performa given in Schedule TA in r espect of all raw materials utilized by 
that unit in the manufacture of Ayurveda or Siddha or Unani drugs in the 
preceding financial year, and shall submit the same by the 30 th day of June of 
the succeeding financial year to the State Drug Licensing Author ity of 
Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs and to the National Medicinal Plants Board 
or any agency nominated by the National Medicinal Plant Board for this 
purpose:] 
725[Provided that the appli cant shall submit the record online th rough portal 
e-AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in) as per the format provided in the said 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
portal and such records shall be retained by the manufacturer for a period of one 
year after the submission.] 
158. Conditions of licence.—A licence in Form 25D shall be subject to 
the conditions stated therein and to the following further conditions, 
namely:— 
(a) The licensee shall maintain proper records of the details of 
manufacture and of the tests, if any, carried out by h im, or by any other 
person on his behalf, of the raw materials and finished products. 
(b) The licensee shall allow an Inspector appointed under the Act to enter 
any premises where the manufacture of a substance in respect of which the 
licence is issued is carried on, to inspect the premises, to take samples of the 
raw materials as well as the finished products, and to inspect the records 
maintained under these rales. 
726[(c) The applicant and inspector shall submit the record online through e-
AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in) portal as per the format provided in 
the said portal.] 
727[158A. Conditions of loan licence.—A licence in Form 25E shall be 
subject to the following further conditions, namely:— 
(a) The licence in Form 25E shall be deemed to be cancelled or 
suspended, if the licence owned by the licensee in Form 25D whose 
manufacturing facilities have been availed of by the licensee is cancelled or 
suspended, as the case may be, under these rules. 
(b) The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act and of the 
rules and with such further requirements if any, as may be specified in any 
rules subsequently made under Chapter IVA of the Act, provided that where 
such further requirements are specified in the rules, these would come into 
force four months after publication in the Official Gazette. 
(c) The licensee shall maintain proper records of the details of 
manufacture and of the tests, if an y, carried out by him, or any other person 
on his behalf, the raw materials and finished products. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(d) The licensee shall allow an Inspector appointed under the Act to 
inspect all registers and records maintained under these rules and shall 
supply to th e Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose 
of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and the rules have been 
observed.] 
728[(e) The applicant and inspector shall submit the record online through e -
AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in) portal as per the format provided in 
the said portal.] 
729[158B. Guidelines for issue of license with respect to Ayurveda, Siddha 
or Unani drags. —I. (A) Ayur veda, Siddha Unani Medicines under section 
3(a):— Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs includes all medicines intended for 
internal or external use for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or 
prevention of disease or disorder in human beings or animals, and manufactured 
exclusively in accordance with the formulae described in the authoritative books 
of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Tibb system of medicine, as specified in the 
First Schedule; 
(B) Patent or proprietary medicine under section 3(h)— 
(i) In relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Tibb system of medicine of 
all formulations containing only such ingredients mentioned in the formulae 
described in the authoritative books of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani Tibb 
system of medicines specified in the First S chedule, but does not include a 
medicine which is administered by parenteral route and also a formulation 
included in the authoritative books as specified in clause (a); 
(ii) Balya/Poshak/Muqawi/Unavuporutkal/posilive health Promoter 
formulations having ingredients mentioned in books of First Schedule of the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act and recommended for promotional and preventive 
health; 
(iii) Saundarya Prasadak (Husane afza)/Azhagh -sadhan formulation 
having ingredients mentioned in Books of First Sched ule of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act and recommended for oral, skin, hair and body care; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(iv) Aushadh Ghana (Medicinal plant extracts - dry/wet) extract obtained 
from plant mentioned in books of First Schedule of the Act including 
Aqueous or hydro-alcohol. 
II. (A) For issue of licence to the medicine with respect to Ayurvedic, Siddha 
and Unani, the conditions relating to safety study and the experience or 
evidence of effectiveness shall be such as specified in columns (5) and (6) ot 
The Table given below:— 
Serial 
number Category Ingredient 
(S) 
Indication 
(s) 
Safety 
study 
Experience / Evidence of 
Effectiveness 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

Published 
Literature 
Proof of 
Effectiveness 
1. 
(A) Ayurveda, 
Siddha and 
Unani drugs, 
given in 158B as 
referred in 3(a) 
As per text As per text Not 
Required Required Not Required 
2. 
(B) Any change 
in dosage form 
of Ayurveda, 
Siddha and 
Unani drugs as 
described in 
section 3(a) of 
the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 
1940 
As per text As per text Not 
Required Required Not Required 
3. 
(C) Ayurveda, 
Siddha and 
Unani drugs 
referred in 3(a) 
to be used for 
new indication 
As per text New Not 
Required 
If 
Required Required 
II. (B) For issue of license with respect to Patent or Proprietary medicine. 
The condition relating to Safety studies and experience or evidence of 
effectiveness shall be specified as follows:— 
Serial 
number Category Ingredient 
(S) 
Indication 
(s) 
Safety 
study 
Experience / Evidence of 
Effectiveness 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Serial 
number Category Ingredient 
(S) 
Indication 
(s) 
Safety 
study 
Experience / Evidence of 
Effectiveness 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

Published 
Literature 
Proof of 
Effectiveness 
1. 
Patent or 
Proprietary 
medicine 
As per text Textual 
rationale 
Not 
Required 
Of 
Ingredients 
*Pilot study as per 
relevant protocol 
for Ayurveda, 
Sidha and Unani 
drugs. 
2. 
Ayurveda, 
Siddha, Unani 
drug with any 
of the 
ingredients of 
Schedule E(l) of 
The Dru gs and 
Cosmetics Act, 
1940. 
As per text Existing Required Required Required 

III. For issue of license with respect to Balya and Poshak medicines the 
person who applied for license is required to submit the following: 
(i) Photo-copy of the textual r eference of ingredients used in the 
formulation as mentioned in the book of 1st Schedule; 
(ii) Conduct safety studies in case the product contains of any of the 
ingredients as specified in the Schedule E(l), as per the guidelines for 
evaluation of Ayurveda Siddha and Unani Drugs formulations; 
(iii) For textual indications the safety and effectiveness study is not 
required. 
IV. For issue of license with respect to Saundarya Prasadak (Husane afza/ 
Azhagu Sodhan) the person who applied for license is required to:— 
(i) Submit photo-copy of the textual reference of ingredients used in the 
formulation as mentioned in the book of 1st Schedule; 
(ii) Conduct safety studies, in case the formulation contains of any of 
the ingredients as specified in the Schedule E(l), as per the guidelines for 
evaluation of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani formulation; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(iii) For textual indications the safety and effectiveness study is not 
required. 
V. For issue of license with respect to medicine Aushadh Ghana [extract of 
medicinal plant (dry or wet). 
Serial 
number Category Ingredient 
(S) 
Indication 
(s) 
Safety 
study 
Experience / Evidence of 
Effectiveness 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

Published 
Literature 
Proof of 
Effectiveness 
1. (A)Aqueous As per 
text As per text Not 
Required 
Not 
Required 
Not 
Required 
2. (Al) Aqueous As per 
text 
New 
indication 
Not 
Required 
Not 
Required Required 
3. (B) Hydro-Alcohol As per 
text As per text Not 
Required 
If 
Required 
Not 
Required 
4. (Bl) Hydro-Alcohol As 
specified 
New 
Indication** Required If 
Required Required 
5. Other than 
Hydro/Hydro-Alcohol 
As 
specified 
As 
specified 
Required 
Acute, 
Chronic, 
Mutagenicity 
and 
Teratogenicity 
If 
Required Required 

* The standard protocol will also include concept of Anupan, Prakriti 
& Tridosh, etc., publish ed by Central Research Councils Ayurveda, Siddha, 
Unani and other Government/Research Bodies. 
** New indication means which is other than mentioned in 1st Schedule books 
of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.] 
730[158C. Form of Free S ale Certificate and Non -Conviction 
Certificate.—The State Drug Controller or Licensing Authority shall, on 
request by the Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drugs manufacturer, issue, within 
fifteen days ;from the date of application. Free Sale Certificate in Form 26 E2-I 
for original License holder or in Form 26 E2 -II for loan licensee and Non -
Conviction Certificate for both original and loan license holder in Form 26 E3 
or in the format as specified by the importing country or tenderer respectively, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
after fulfill ment of all requisite formalities as required in the respective 
formats.] 
731[Explanation.—For the purposes of this rule, the applicant shall apply 
online and licensing authority shall issue such certificate online through portal 
e-AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in) as per the format provided in the said 
portal.] 
159. Cancellation and suspension of licences.—(1) The licensing authority 
may, after giving the licensee an opportunity to show c ause, within a period 
which shall not be less than fifteen days form the date of receipt of such notice, 
why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the 
reasons therefor, cancel a licence issued under this Part or suspend it for such 
period as he thinks fit, either wholly or in respect of some of the drugs to which 
it relates, if in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the 
conditions of the licence or with any provisions of the Act or the rules made 
thereunder. 
(2) A licensee whose licence has been suspended or cancelled may appeal to 
the State Government within a period of three months from the date of receipt 
of the order which shall, after considering the appeal, decide the same. 
160. Identification of raw materials.—Raw materials used in the 
preparation of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs shall be identified 
and tested, wherever tests are available for their genuineness, and records of 
such tests as are carried out for the purpose and the methods thereof shall be 
maintained.] 
206[PART XVI (A) 
APPROVAL OF INSTITUTIONS FOR CARRYING OUT TESTS ON 
AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA AND UNANI DRUGS AND RAW MATERIALS 
USED IN THEIR MANUFACTURE ON BEHALF OF LICENSEES FOR 
MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OF AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA AND UNANI 
DRUGS 
160A. Application for grant of approval for testing Ayurvedic, Siddha 
and Unani drugs. —Application for grant or renewal of approval for carrying 
out tests for identity, purity, quality and strength of Ayurvedic, Siddha and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Unani drugs or the raw materials used in the manufacture thereof on behalf of 
licensees for manufacture for sale of the said Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani 
drugs, shall be made in Form 47 to the Licensing Authority appointed by the 
State Government for the purposes of Part XVI, XVII or XVIII of these rules, as 
the case may be, and referred to as the "approving authority" under this Part and 
shall be accompanied by an inspection fee of six thousand rupees in respect of 
the drugs specified in First Schedule to the Act: 
Provided that the applicant shall furnish to the approving authority such 
additional information as may be required by it in connection with the 
application in Form 47: 
Provided further that if the applicant applies for renewal of approval after its 
expiry but within six months of such expiry, the inspection fee payable shall be 
six thousand rupees plus an additional inspection fee at the rate of one thousand 
rupees per month in the case of testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs 
specified in First Schedule to the Act. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this Part, the words "Ayurvedic, Siddha 
and Unani drags" shall also mean and include the raw materials used in the 
manufacture of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs, as the case may be. 
160B. Form in which approval to be granted for carrying out tests on 
Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs on behalf of licensees for manufacture 
of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs and conditions for grant or renewal 
of such approval.—(1) Approval for carrying out such t ests of identity, purity, 
quality and strength of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs as may be required 
under the provisions of these rules, on behalf of licensee for manufacture of 
Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs shall be granted in Form 48. 
207[(1A) The licence shall be issued within a period of two months, from the 
date of receipt of the application or from the date of fulfillment of shortcomings, 
if any, as the case may be, communicated by the licensing authority.] 
(2) Before approval in Form 48 is granted or renewed, the following 
conditions shall be complied with by the applicants, namely:— 
(i) The premises where the tests are carried out shall be well lighted and 
properly ventilated except where the nature of tests of any A yurvedic, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Siddha and Unani drug warrants otherwise. Wherever necessary, the 
premises shall be air -conditioned so as to maintain the accuracy and 
functioning of laboratory instruments or to enable the performance of 
special tests such as sterility tests and microbiological tests. 
(ii) (a) The applicant shall provide adequate space having regard to the 
nature and number of samples of drugs proposed to be tested: 
Provided that the approving authority shall determine from time to 
time whether the space provided continues to be adequate. Provided 
further that separate section shall be provided for (i) Chemistry, (ii) 
Pharmacognosy, (iii) Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani, (iv) 
Microbiology, (v) Sample Room, (vi) Office -cum-Record Room, 
with proper partitions and minimum required area is 800 sq. ft. 
208*(b) The applicant shall provide a list of persons who may be 
employed with him as experts, such as Chemist, Botanist and expert 
in Avurveda/Siddha/Unani or Pharmacist who shall possess a degree 
in Chemistry, Botany, Ayurved a/Siddha/ Unani/Bachelor in 
Pharmacy from a recognized University or equivalent, with 
experience for 2 years for carrying out tests or analysis as per the 
Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani pharmacopoeias. 
(c) The applicant shall provi de adequate equipments essential for 
carrying out tests for identity, purity, quality and strength of 
Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs as per pharmacopoeial standards 
or other available standards. 

List of equipment recommended is given below: 
CHEMISTRY SECTION 
1. Alcohol determination apparatus complete set. 
2. Volatile oil determination apparatus. 
3. Boiling point determination apparatus. 
4. Melting point determination apparatus. 
5. Refractometer 
6. Polarimeter. 
7. Viscometer (ostwalds, Redwood viscometer). 
8. Tablet disintegration apparatus. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
9. Moisture determination apparatus (IC filtrator). 
10. U.V. Spectro-Photometer. 
11. Muffle furnace. 
12. Electronic Balance. 
13. Hot air oven(s) different range of temperature/vacuum oven. 
14. Refrigerator. 
15. Glass distillation apparatus/plant. 
16. Water supply demineralised exchange equipment/Distillation equipment. 
17. Air conditioner. 
18. LPG Gas Cylinder with burners. 
19. Water bath (temperature controlled). 
20. Heating mantle (4) or as required. 
21. TLC apparatus with all accessories. 
22. Sieves 10 to 120 with sieve shaker. 
23. Centrifuge machine. 
24. Dehumidifier (where necessary). 
25. PH meter. 
26. G.L.C. with F.I. detector. 
27. Silica crucible. 
28. Tablet friability tester. 
29. Tablet dissolution tester. 
30. Other related equipment, regents, chemicals and glasswares. 
PHARMACOGNOSY SECTION 
1. Microscope binocular. 
2. Dissecting Microscope 
3. Microtome 
4. Chemical balance 
5. Microslide cabinet. 
6. Aluminium slide trays. 
7. Hot air oven 
8. Occular Micrometer 
9. Stage Micrometer 
10. Camera Lucida Prism type and mirror type. 
11. Hot plates. 
12. Refrigerator. 
13. LPG Cylinder with burners. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
14. Other related equipments, reagents, glasswares, etc. 
Note.—Instruments like HPLC, HPTLC, Atomic Absorption 
spectrophotometer could be arranged by tie up with other laboratories. 
MICROBIOLOGY SECTION 
1. Laminar air flow bench (L.A.F.). 
2. B.O.D. Incubator. 
3. Plain incubator. 
4. Serological water bath. 
5. Oven. 
6. Autoclave/Sterilizer. 
7. Microscope (high power). 
8. Colony counter. 
9. Other related equipment and reagents. 
(3) The applicant shall provide and maintain suita ble equipment having 
regard to the nature and number of samples of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani 
drugs intended to be tested which shall be adequate in the opinion of the 
approving authority. 
(4) The testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs, as the ca se may be, 
for identity, purity, quality and strength shall be carried out under the active 
direction of one of the experts stated in clause (b) of sub -rule (2) who shall be 
the person-in-charge of testing and shall be held responsible for the reports of 
test issued by the applicant. 
(5) The testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs, as the case may be, 
for identity, purity, quality and strength shall be carried out by persons whose 
qualifications and experience of testing are adequate as stated in cl ause (b) of 
sub-rule (2). 
(6) The applicant shall provide books of standard recognized under the 
provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder and such books of reference 
as may be required in connection with the testing or analysis of the product s for 
the testing of which approval is applied for. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(7) The applicant shall provide list of standard Ayurvedic, Siddha and 
Unani drugs (with Reference samples) recognized under the provisions of the 
Act and rules made thereunder and such reference sampl es kept in the 
laboratory may be required in connection with the testing or analysis of the 
products of which approval is applied for. 
160C. Duration of approval.—An approval granted in Form 41 or renewed 
in Form 42 unless sooner suspended or withdrawn, shall be valid for a period of 
three years from the date on which it is granted or renewed: 
Provided that if an application for the renewal of an approval in Form 40 is 
made before its expiry or if the application is made within six months of its 
expiry afte r the payment of the additional inspection fee, the approval shall 
continue to be in force until orders to the contrary are passed on the application 
and the approval shall be deemed to have expired if the application for renewal 
is not made within six months of expiry. 
160D. Conditions of approval. —An approval in Form 41 shall be subject 
to the following conditions, namely: 
I. The Institution granted approval under this Part (hereinafter referred to 
as the approved laboratory) shall provide and maintain adequate staff 
and adequate premises and equipment as specified in rule 160 B. 
II. The approved laboratory shall provide proper facilities for storage so as 
to preserve the properties of the samples to be tested by it. 
III. The approved laboratory s hall maintain records of tests for identity, 
purity, quality and strength carried out on all samples of Ayurvedic, 
Siddha and Unani drugs and the results thereof together with the 
protocols of tests showing the readings and calculation in such form as 
to be available for inspection and such records shall be retained in the 
case of substances for which date of expiry is assigned; for a period of 
two years from such date of expiry and in the case of other substances, 
for a period of three years. 
IV. The approved laboratory shall allow the Inspector appointed under this 
Act to enter with or without prior notice the premises where the testing 
is carried out and to inspect the premises and the equipment used for test 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
and the testing procedures employed. The la boratory shall allow the 
Inspectors to inspect the registers and records maintained under these 
rules and shall supply to such Inspectors such information as they may 
require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act 
and rules made thereunder have been observed. 
V. The approved laboratory shall from time to time report to the approving 
authority any changes in the person -in-charge of testing of Ayurvedic, 
Siddha and Unani drugs or the expert staff responsible for testing, as the 
case may be, and any material alterations in the premises or changes in 
the equipment used for the purposes of testing which have been made 
since the date of last inspection made on behalf of the approving 
authority before the grant or renewal of approval. 
VI. The approved laboratory shall furnish reports of the results of tests or 
analysis in Form 50. 
VII. In case any sample of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug is found on 
test to be not of standard quality, the approved laboratory shall furnish to 
the approving authority and the licensing authority of the State where 
the manufacturer and/or sender of the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani 
drugs is located, a copy of the test report on the sample with the 
protocols of tests applied. 
VIII. The approved laboratory shall comply with the provisions of the Act 
and rules made thereunder and with such further requirements, if any, as 
may be specified in the rules made from time to time under Chapter IVA 
of the Act of which the approving authority has given the appr oved 
laboratory not less than four months' notice. 
IX. The approved laboratory shall maintain an inspection book to enable the 
Inspector to record his impression or defects notices. 
160E. Inspection before grant of approval. —Before an approval in Form 
48 i s granted, the approving authority shall cause the laboratory at which the 
testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs, as the case may be, is proposed 
to be carried out to be inspected jointly by the Inspectors appointed or 
designated by the Central Gove rnment and State Government for this purpose, 
who shall examine the premises and the equipment intended to be used for 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
testing of drugs and varify into the professional qualifications of the expert staff 
who are or may be employed by the laboratory. 
160F. Report of inspection. —The Inspectors appointed by the Central 
Government as stated in rule 160E shall forward to the approving authority a 
detailed report of the results of the inspection. 
160G. Procedure of approving authority. —(1) If the approving author ity 
after such further enquiry, if any, as it may consider necessary, is satisfied that 
the requirements of the rules made under the Act have been complied with and 
that the conditions of the approval and the rules made under the Act have been 
observed, it shall grant approval in Form 48. 
(2) If the approving authority is not so satisfied, it shall reject the application 
and shall inform the applicant of the reasons for such rejection and of the 
conditions which shall be satisfied before approval could be granted. 
160H. Application after rejection. —If within a period of six months from 
the rejection of an application for approval, the applicant informs the approving 
authority that the conditions laid down have been satisfied and deposits 
inspection fee of tw o thousand rupees, the approving authority may, if, after 
causing a further inspection to be made and after being satisfied that the 
conditions for grant of approval have been complied with, grant the approval in 
Form 48. 
160-I. Renewal—On an application b eing made for renewal, the approving 
authority shall, after causing an inspection to be made and if satisfied that the 
conditions of the approval and the rules made under the Act have been complied 
with, shall issue a certificate of renewal in Form 49. 
160J. Withdrawal and suspension of approvals. —(1) The approving 
authority may, after giving the approved laboratory an opportunity to show 
cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the 
reasons therefor, withdraw an approval granted under this Part or suspend it for 
such period as it thinks fit either wholly or in respect of testing of some of the 
categories of Avurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs to which it relates, if in his 
opinion the approved laboratory had failed to comply with any of the conditions 
of the approval or with any provision of the Act of the rules made thereunder. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(2) any approved laboratory, whose approval has been suspended or 
withdrawn, may, within three months of the date of the order of suspension or 
withdrawal, appeal to the State Government which shall dispose of the appeal in 
consultation with a panel of competent persons appointed by the Department of 
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy, Government of India in this 
behalf and notified in the Official Gazette.] 
732[160K. Information to be uploaded by the licencee on online portal. —
(1) The applicant or licencee under this part shall register with portal, e -
AUSHADHI (www.e -aushadhi.gov.in) and upload information, as per the 
format provided in the said portal, pertaining to licence application, renewal, 
tests carried out and other such information as required and shall be updated 
from time to time. 
(2) The information uploaded by the licencee in the portal under sub -rule (1) 
shall be verified by the concerned licensing authority.] 
733[PART XVII 
734[LABELLING, PACKING AND LIMIT OF ALCOHOL IN] 
AYURVEDIC (INCLUDING SIDDHA) OR UNANI DRUGS 
161. 734[Labelling, packing and limit of alcohol]. —(1) There shall be 
conspicuously displayed on the label of the container or package of an 
Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drug, the true list of all the ingredients 
735[with the botani cal names of plant based ingredients along with plant part(s) 
and form of ingredients, in which, these are] used in the manufacture of the 
preparation together with the quantity of each of the ingredients incorporated 
therein and a reference to the method of preparation thereof as detailed in the 
standard text and Adikarana, as are prescribed in the authoritative books 
specified in the First Schedule of the Act 735[and in respect of Patent or 
Proprietary Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs, the true list of all the ingredients 
with the botanical names of plant based ingredients along with plant part(s) and 
form of ingredients, in which, these are used in the formulation, with their 
quantity: 
Provided that if needed, standardized abbreviations prescribed for part(s) and 
form of Ingredient(s) in the official Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani 
Pharmacopoeias and Formularies, may be used on the label:] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Provided that if the list of ingredients contained in the medicine is large and 
cannot be accommodated on the label, the same may be printed separately and 
enclosed with the packing and reference be made to this effect on the label. 
(2) The container of a medicine for internal use made up ready for the 
treatment of human ailments shall, if it is made up from a substance specified in 
Schedule E(l), be labelled conspicuously with the words 'Caution: to be taken 
under medical supervision' both English and Hindi languages. 
(3) Subject to the other provisions of these rules, the following particulars 
shall be either printed or written in indelible ink and shall appear in a 
conspicuous manner on the label of the innermost container of any Ayurvedic 
(including Siddha) or Unani drug 735[and Patent or Proprietary Ayurveda, 
Siddha or Unani drugs] and on any other covering in which the container is 
packed, namely:— 
(i) The name of the drug. 736[For Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani Drug] 
purpose the name shall be the same as mentioned in the authoritative 
books included in the First Schedule of the Act. 
(ii) A correct statement of the net content in terms of weight, measure or 
number as the case may be. The weight and volume shall be 
expressed in metric system. 
(iii) The name and address of the manufacturer. 
(iv) The number of the licence under which the drug is manufactured, the 
figure representing the manufacturing licence number being preceded 
by the words 'Manufacturing Licence Number' or "Mfg. Lie. No." or 
"M.L.". 
 (v) A distinctive batch number, that is to say, the number by reference 
to which details of manufacture of the particular batch from which 
the substance in the container is taken are recorded and are available 
for inspection, the figure representing the batch number being 
preceded by the words "Batch No." or "Batch" or "Lot Number" or 
"Lot No." or "Lot" or any distinguishing prefix. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(vi) The date of manufacture. For this purpose the date of manufacture 
shall be the date of completion of the final products, or the date of 
bottling or packing for issue. 
(vii) The words "Ayurvedic medicine" or "Siddha medicine" or "Unani 
medicine" as the case may be. 
(viii) The words "FOR EXTERNAL USE ONLY" if the medicine is for 
external application. 
(ix) Every drug intended for distribution to the medical profession as a 
free sample shall, while complying with the labelling provisions 
under clause (i) or (viii), further bear on the label of the container the 
words "Physician's sample. Not to be sold" which shall be 
overprinted. 
737 [(x) (a) Preparation (Asavas) with high content of alcohol as base. 
Name of the drug Maximum size of packing 
(i) Kapur Asava 15 ml. 
(ii) Ahiphenasava 15 ml. 
(iii) Margamadasava 15 ml. 
(b) Preparation containing self-generated alcohol. 
Name of the drug Maximum content of alcohol 
(Ethylalcohol v/v) Maximum size of packing 
(i) Mritsanjivani Sura 16 per cent 30 ml. 
(ii) Mahadrakshava 16 per cent 120 ml.] 
(4) Nothing in these rules shall be deemed to require the labe lling of airy 
transparent cover or of any wrapper -case or other covering used solely for the 
purpose of packing, transport in delivery.] 
738[161A. Exemption in labelling and packing provisions for export of 
Ayurvedic (including Siddha) and Unani Drugs.—(1) Label and packages or 
containers of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs for export may be adapted to 
meet the specific requirements of the law of the country to which the said drugs 
is to be exported, but the following particulars shall appear in conspicuous 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
position on the container in which drug is packed and on every other covering in 
which that container is packed, namely:— 
(a) name of the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug (single or compound 
formulation); 
(b) the name, ad dress of the manufacturer and the number of licence 
under which the drug has been manufactured; 
(c) batch or lot number; 
(d) date of manufacture, along with date for "Best for use before". 
(e) main ingredients, if required by the importing country; 
(f) for EXPORT: 
Provided that where Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani single or compound drug 
not classified under the First Schedule or Schedule E(l), is required by the 
consignee to be not labelled with the name and address of the manufacturer, the 
labels on packages or containers shall bear a code number as approved by the 
licensing authority mentioned in rule 152. 
(2) The provisions of rule 161 shall not apply to a medicine made u p “ready 
for treatment ” whether after, or without, alteration, which is sup plied on the 
prescription of a registered medical practi tioner, if the medicine is labelled with 
the following particulars, namely:— 
(a) the name and address of the suppliers; 
(b) the words "For External Use Only", if the medicine is for external 
application.] 
739[161B. Shelf life or date of expiry of medicines.—(1) The date of expiry 
of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani medicines shall be conspicuously displayed on 
the label of container or package of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Una ni medicine, as 
the case may be, and after the said date of expiry, no medicine shall be 
marketed, sold, distributed or consumable; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Provided that this rule shall apply to Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani medicines 
seeking licence or renewal of licence for manufacturing af ter the date of 
notification of the rules. 
Provided also that this rule shall not be applicable to the Ayurvedic, Siddha 
or Unani medicines manufactured and marketed prior to the date of this 
notification. 
 (2) Every person applying for licence or renew al of licence for the 
manufacturing of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani medicines defined under clause 
(h) of section 3 of the Act shall submit to the State Licensing Authority 
scientific data based shelf life or date of expiry of the medicine based on the 
Real t ime stability studies of medicines in accordance with the guidelines 
prescribed in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India. 
Provided that this sub-rule shall be applicable after three years from the date 
of notification of the rules. 
(3) The guidelines reg arding stability studies as prescribed in the 
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, Part -I, Volume-VIII shall be applicable to 
all the medicines of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani. 
(4) The State Licensing Authority shall, before granting license or renewal 
of license for an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani medicine, ensure validity of the 
data submitted by the manufacturer in support of the claimed shelf -life of that 
medicine. 
(5) The State Licensing Authority may at any time direct the manufacturer 
to provide the samples of the medicine and any other related information; and 
may share it with the Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine, 
Ghaziabad for analysis or independent validation. 
(6) Where the manufacturer fails to comply with direction of the State 
licensing Authority under sub -rule (5), the license for the manufacturing of the 
medicine shall be liable for suspension after giving a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard. 
(7) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the State Licensing 
Authority under sub-rule (6), may within sixty days of such order, appeal to the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Central Government, and the Central Government may, after such enquiry into 
the matter as is considered necessary, pass such order in relation thereto as it 
deems fit. The decision of the Central Government shall be final and binding. 
(8) The shelf life or date of expiry of an Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani 
medicine defined under clause (a) of section 3 of the Act shall, unless otherwise 
determined on the basis of scientific data, be as follows:— 
(Ayurvedic medicines) 
SI. 
No. Dosage form 
Shelf life or date of 
expiry with effect from 
the date of manufacture 
(1) (2) (3) 
(i) Anjana 
 (a) Anjana made from Kasthaushadhi 1 year 

(b) Anjana made from Kasthaushadhi along with 
Rasa/ Uprasa / Bhasma 2 years 
 (c) Anjana made only from Rasa/Uprasa/Bhasma 3 years 
(ii) Arka 1 year 
(iii) Asava Arista 10 years 
(iv) Avaleha, Khanda, Paka, Guda 3 years 
(v) Chuma, Kwatha Chuma, Lepa Chuma, Danta 
Manjan (Chuma) 2 years 
(vi) Dhoopan 2 years 
(vii) Dravaka, Lavana, Kshara 5 years 
(viii) Ghrita 2 years 
(ix) Guggulu 5 years 
(x) Gutika/Vati 

(I) Gutika or Vati containing Kasthaushadhi along 
with Rasa/Uprasa/Bhasma/Guggulu (including Lepa 
Gutika and GhanVati) 
5 years 

(II) Gutika or Vati contain ing only Kasthaushadhi 
(including Lepa Gutika and Ghan Vati) 3 years 
 (III) Gutika/Vati containing only 10 years 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Ras/Uprasa/Bhasma except Naga, Vanga and Tamra 
Bhasma 
(xi) Kama /Nasabindu 2 years 
(xii) Kupipakva Rasayana 10 years 
(xiii) Malahar 3 years 
(xiv) Mandura-Lauha 10 years 
(xv) Naga Bhasma, Vanga Bhasma and Tamra Bhasma 5 years 
(xvi) Netrabindu 1 year 
(xvii) Parpati 10 years 
(xviii) Pishti and Bhasma except Naga, Vanga and Tamra 
Bhasma 10 years 
(xix) Pravahi Kwatha 3 years 

(1) (2) (3) 
(xx) 
Rasayoga 
(I) Rasayoga Containing only Rasa/Uprasa/Bhasma 
except Naga, Vanga and Tamra Bhasma 10 years 
(II) Rasayoga Containing Rasa/Uprasa/Bhasma along 
with Kasthaushadhi/Guggulu 5 years 
(xxi) Sattva (derived from medicinal plant) 2 years 
(xxii) Sharkar/Panak / Sharbat 3 years 
(xxiii) Shveta parpati 2 years 
(xxiv) Taila 3 years 
(xxv) Varti 2 years 
(Siddha medicines) 
SI. 
No. Dosage form 
Shelf life or date 
of expiry with 
effect from the 
date of 
manufacture 
(1) (2) (3) 
(i) Curanam 

Kutinir Curanam/Adai Curanam/Kanchi Curanam/Utkali 
Curanam/Pittu Curanam/Podithimirthal Curanam/Podi/ 2 years 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Pattru Curanam/Pottanam or Kizhi Curanam/Ottratam 
Curanam/Vethu Curanam/Pugai Curanam/Kah 
Curanam/Thuvalai Curanam 
(ii) Mattirai/V atakam 
(I) Conta ining only Moohgai ingredients (including 
Kudineer Curanam Mattirai) (e.g. Nilavembu kutinir 
Mattirai) 
2 years 
(II) Containing Mooligai ingredients along with Thathu 
Porutkal/Jeeva Porutkal/Parpam/Centuram/Cunnam. 
(including kutinir Curanam Mattirai) 
5 years 
(m) Containing only Thathu Porutkal/Parpam/Centuram/ 
Cimnam/Kattu/Kalanku. 10 years 
(iii) Rasa-Paadana Marunthugal (All Mercurial Preparation) 
(I) Containing Mooligai ingredients along with Thathu 
Porutkal/Parpan/Centuram/Cunnam/ Kattu/Kalanku 2 years 
(II) Containing only Thathu Porutkal/Parpam/ 
Centuram/Cunnam Kattu/Kalanku 10 years 
(iv) Parpam/Centuram 
(I) Containing only Mooligai ingredients (e.g. Kungiliya 
Parpam) 2 years 

(1) (2) (3) 

(II) Containing Mooligai ingredients with Thath u 
Porutkal/Parpam/Centuram/Cunnam/Kattu / Kalanku (e.g., 
Aya Centuram) 
10 years 

(HI) Containing Mooligai ingredients with Jeeva Porutkal 
(e.g., Sangu Parpam) 10 years 
(v) Karuppu 

(I) Containing only Mooligai ingredients (e.g., Vasambu 
Sutta Kari) 2 years 

(II) Containing Mooligai ingredients with Thathu 
Porutkal (e.g., Sivanar Amirtham, Thalaga Karuppu) 5 years 

(III) Containing Mooligai ingredients with Jeeva Porutkal 
(e.g., Kasthuri Karuppu, Pattu Karuppu) 5 years 
(vi) Patankam 
 (I) Mooligai based Patankam (e.g., Sambirani Patankam) 5 years 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
 (II) Rasa based Patankam (eg., Rasa Centuram) 10 years 
(vii) Kulampu 
 Based on process— 
 (I) Araippu Kulampu (e.g., Agathiyar Kulampu) 5 years 
 (II) Erippu Kulampu (e.g., Kumatti Kulampu) 3 years 
(viii) Meluku 
 Based on process— 
 (I) Araippu Meluku (e.g., Linga Meluku) 5 years 
 Based on Process— 

(II) Idippu Meluku (e.g., Rasa Gandhi Meluku/Idi Vallthi 
Meluku) 3 years 
 Based on raw materials- 
 (III) Mooligai Meluku (e.g., Malaikudara Meluku) 3 years 
(ix) Karpam 
 Based on raw materials— 

(I) Mooligai Karpam (e.g., Karisalai Karpam, Thiripala 
Karpam) 2 years 
 Based on raw materials— 

(II) Mooligai Thathu Karpam (e.g., Aya Bringaraja 
Karpam) 5 years 
 Based on process- 
 (III) Araippu Karpam (e.g., Irunelli Karpam) 3 years 
(x) Satthu 
 (I) Satthu derived from Mooligai (e.g., Seenthil Satthu) 2 years 

(II) Satthu derived from Thathu Porutkal (e.g., Aya Satthu, 
Eya Satthu,Thurusu Satthu) 10 years 
(1) (2) (3) 

(III) Satthu derived fro m Jeeva Porutkal (e.g., Sembu 
Satthu derived from Poonagam, Mayiliragu) 5 years 
(xi) Ilakam/Legiyam/Iracayanaam 3 years 
(xii) Kallikkam/Mai/Kalimbu/Neer/Venney 1 year 
(xiii) Karam (Karanool) 2 years 
(xiv) Kattu (Medicated bandage cloth)/See!ai/Varthy/Thiri 1 year 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(xv) Kattu/Kalanku/Cunnam 10 years 
(xvi) Kutinir/Kiyazham (with preservatives) 3 years 
(xvii) Manappaku/Panagam 3 years 
(viii) Nasiyathuli/Kanthuli/Sevithuli 1 year 
(xix) Ney/Ghirutham/Kadugu 2 years 
(XX) Oothal./Nasigaparanam/Thoopasarakku 1 year 
(xxi) Pakkuvam, Thennoral 1 year 
(xxii) Panda Vaippu 10 years 
(xxiii) Peechu 2 years 
(xxiv) Sutigai 2 years 
(xxv) Tailam/Ennai/Poochu 3 years 
(xxvi) Tinir 1 year 
(xxvii) Tiravakam (derived from Thathu Porutkal ) 2 years 
(Unani medicines) 
SI. 
No. Dosage form 
Shelf life or date of expiry 
with effect from the date of 
manufacture 
(1) (2) (3) 
(i) Arq (except Arq-e-Ajeeb) 1 year 
(ii) Arq-e-Ajeeb 5 years 
(iii) Ayarij / Sunoon/Zuroor/Ghazah 2 years 
(iv) Burood 1 year 
(v) Shiyaf 2 years 
(vi) Surma/Kohal 3 years 
(vii) Habb 3 years 
(viii) Halwa 3 years 
(ix) Itrifai 3 years 
(x) lauhar/Jawahir 5 years 
(xi) Jawarish 4 years 
(xii) Khamira 3 years 

(1) (2) (3) 
(xiii) Kushta 10 years 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(xiv) Laboob 3 years 
(xv) Laooq 3 years 
(xvi) Majoon/Dawa 3 years 
(xvii) Marham/Zimad/Qairooti 2 years 
(xviii) Mufarreh 3 years 
(xix) Murabba 1 year 
(xx) Nabeez 10 years 
(xxi) Qurs 3 years 
(xxii) Qutoor 1 year 
(xxiii) Raughaniyat/Tila 3 years 
(xxiv) Sharbat,/ Sikajabeen 3 years 
(xxv) 
(I) Sufoof (Without Salt) 2 years 
(II) Sufoof (Containing salt) 1 year 
(xxvi) Tiryaq 3 years.] 

740[PART XVIII 
GOVERNMENT ANALYSTS AND INSPECTORS FOR AYURVEDIC 
(INCLUDING SIDDHA) OR UNANI DRUGS 
162. Duties of inspectors specially authorise d to inspect the manufacture of 
Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs.—Subject to the instructions of 
the controlling authority, it shall be the duty of an Inspector authorised to 
inspect the manufacture of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs— 
(i) to inspect not less than twice a year, all premises licensed for 
manufacture of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs within 
the area allotted to him and to satisfy himself that the conditions of 
the licence and the provisions of the Act and the rules made 
thereunder are being observed; 
(ii) to send forthwith to the controlling authority after each inspection a 
detailed report indicating whether or not the conditions of the 
licence and the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunde r 
are being observed; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(iii) to take samples of the drugs manufactured on the premises and 
send them for test or analysis in accordance with these rules; 
(iv) to institute prosecution in respect of violation of the Act and the 
rules made thereunder. 
741[162A. Qualifications for State Drug Licensing Authority for licensing 
of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs. —(a) The Ayurvedic/Siddha/Unani 
qualifications as per Schedule II of CCIM Act 1970/B. Pharma (Ayurveda) of a 
recognized University. 
(b) At least 5 years' experience in the Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani drug 
manufacturing or testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs or enforcement 
of provisions of Chapter IVA of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and rules 
made thereunder or teach ing/ research on clinical practice of 
Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani System.] 
163. Procedure for despatch of sample to Government Analyst and its 
receipt by the Government Analyst. —(1) Sample for test or analysis shall be 
sent to the Government Analyst by registere d post or by hand in a sealed 
package enclosed together with a memorandum in Form 18A in an outer cover 
addressed to the Government Analyst. 
(2) The package as well as the outer cover shall be marked with 
distinguishing number. 
(3) A copy of the memorandum and a specimen impression of the seal used 
to seal the package shall be sent by registered post or by hand to the 
Government Analyst. 
(4) On receipt of the package from an Inspector, the Government Analyst 
or an Officer authorised by him writing in this behalf shall open the package 
and shall also record the conditions of the seals on the package. 
(5) After the test or analysis has been completed, one copy of the results of 
the test or analysis shall be supplied forthwith to the sender in Form 13 A. A 
copy of the result in Form 13A shall be sent simultaneously to the controlling 
authority and to the Drugs Controller, India. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
742[PHARMACOPOEIA COMMISSION FOR INDIAN MEDICINE AND 
HOMOEOPATHY AND CENTRAL DRUGS LABORATORY OF 
INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY TO FUNCTION AS 
CENTRAL DRUGS LABORATORY FOR THE PURPOSE OF TESTING 
OR ANALYSIS OF AYURVEDA, SIDDHA, UNANI AND 
HOMOEOPATHY DRUGS 
163A. Functions.—Pharmacopoeia Commission of Indian Medicine and 
Homoeopathy at Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh) under the Central Government shall 
function to develop and amend standards of Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani and 
Homoeopathy drugs and publish pharmacopoeial monographs, formularies and 
standardize procedures with the approval of the Central Government l aboratory 
of the Pharmacopoeia Commission shall be the Central Drugs Laboratory for 
Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy for the purpose of testing or analysis of 
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy Drugs. 
163AA.—(1) The Central Government shall, by notific ation in the Official 
Gazette and with effect from such date as may be specified therein, constitute 
Scientific Advisory Board for the Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian 
Medicine and Homoeopathy for a term of three years, to advise the Central 
Government, the State Governments and the stakeholders on the matters of 
standards, standard operating procedures and testing protocols of Ayurveda, 
Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy Drugs. 
 (2) The Scientific Advisory Board shall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(i) Retired Scientific Expert of drugs to be nominated as Chairman 
by the Central Government; 
(ii) Director, Pharmacopoiea Commission for Indian Medicine and 
Homoeopathy; ex officio Member Secretary; 
(iii) Advisor dealing with drugs, Ministry of AYUSH, ex officio-, 
(iv) Drugs Controler General, India, ex officio; 
(v) Scientific Director, Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, ex 
officio; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(vi) Director General, Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic 
Sciences, ex officio; 
(vii) Director General, Central Council for Research in Unani 
Medicine, ex officio; 
(viii) Director General, Central Council for Research in Siddha, ex 
officio; 
(ix) Director General, Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy, 
ex officio; 
(x) Central Governm ent Analyst for Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and 
Homoeopathy, Drugs, ex officio; 
(xi) One professionally experienced expert each of standardization or 
quality control of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, Homoeopathy drugs, 
pharmacognosy or botany, chemistry, Phyto -chemistry and pharmacy 
to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the 
scientific institutions. 
(xii) Chairman shall have the discretion to co -opt two experts for 
advice and guidance in specific matters of standards of Ayurvedic, 
Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs. 
(3) The functions of Scientific Advisory Board may be exercised 
notwithstanding any vacancy therein. 
(4) The Commission shall constitute a pharmacopoeia committee and sub -
committees there under for a period of three years on th e recommendation of 
Scientific Advisory Board. 
(5) The meetings of Scientific Advisory Board, Pharmacopoeia Committee 
and Subcommittees shall be supported by the Commission.] 
743[163B. The functions of the Central Drug Laborat ory in respect of 
Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs shall be carried out at the 
Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, 
Ghaziabad, (Uttar Pradesh) and the functions of the Director in respect of the 
said drugs shall be exercised by the Director of the said laboratory. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
163BB. (1) The laboratory of Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian 
Medicine and Homoeopathy shall act as the Central Appellate Drugs Laboratory 
under section 6 of the Act for testing or analysis of samples of A yurveda, 
Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy Drugs as may be sent to it under sub -
section(2) of section 11 or sub-section(4) of section 25 and 33H of the said Act. 
(2) The Central Drugs Laboratory shall maintain reference museum and 
herbarium of Ayurveda, Sid dha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs, conduct 
training programmes for analytical and drugs quality control methods and carry 
out such activities and duties as may be entrusted to it by the Central 
Government. 
(3) All functions of the Central Drugs Laborator y for Ayurvedic, Siddha, 
Unani and Homoeopathy drugs shall be exercised by the Director or the officer 
appointed on his behalf of the Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine 
and Homoeopathy.] 
163C. Despatch of samples for test or analysis.—(1) Samples for testing or 
analysis of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs under sub -section (2) of section 
11 or sub -section (1) of section 25 and section 33H of the Act shall be sent by 
registered post in a sealed packet, enclosed with a memorandum in Form 1A, 
744[Form 18 or Form 18-A] specified in Schedule A, in an outer cover addressed 
to the Director, 745[Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine and 
Homoeopathy, Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh)]. 
(2) The packet a s well as the outer cover, shall be marked with a 
distinguishing number. 
(3) A copy of the memorandum in Form 1A and a specimen impression of 
the seal used to seal the packet shall be sent separately by re gistered post to the 
Director, 746[Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine and 
Homoeopathy, Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh)]. 
163D. Recording of condition of seals. —On receipt of the packet, it shall 
be opened by an officer authorised in writing on that behalf by the Director, 
746[Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, 
Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh)], who shall record the condition of the seal on the 
packet. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
163E. Report of result of test or analysis.—After test or analysis, the result 
of the test or analysis, together with full protocols of the tests applied, shall be 
supplied forthwith to the sender in Form 2A 747[or Form 13] of as specified in 
the said Schedule. 
163F. Fees.—The fees for test and analysis s hall be as specified in Schedule 
B-l. 
163G. Signature on certificates. —Certificates issued under these rules by 
the 746[Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, 
Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh)] shall be signed by t he Director or by an officer 
authorised by the Central Government to sign such certificates.] 
748[164. Method of test or analysis to be employed in relation to 
Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani or Homoeopathy drugs. —The method of test or 
analysis to be employed in relation to an Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani or 
Homoeopathy drugs shall be such as may be specified in the Ayurvedic, Siddha, 
Unani or Homoeopathy Pharmacopoeia, or if no such pharmacopoeias are 
available or if no test is specified in such pharmacopoeias, such test as the 
Government Analyst may employ, such tests being scientifically established to 
determine whether the drug contains the ingredients as stated on the label.] 
165. Qualifications of Government Analyst.—A person who is ap pointed 
a Government Analyst under section 33F of the Act shall be a person possessing 
the qualifications prescribed in rule 44 or a degree in 749[Ayurveda, Siddha, 
Unani or Homoeopathy] system, as the case may be, conferred by a University, 
a State Government or Statutory Faculties, Councils 750[Boards of Indian 
Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy Boards] recognised by the Central or 
State Government, as the case may be, for this purpose and has had not less than 
three years' post -graduate experience in the analysis of drugs in a laboratory 
under the control of (i) a Government Analyst appointed under the Act, or (ii) a 
Chemical Examiner to Government, or (iii) the head of an institution specially 
approved for the purpose by the appointing authority. 
166. Duties of Government Analyst.—(1) The Government Analyst shall 
analyse or test or cause to be analysed or tested such samples of 751[Ayurveda, 
Siddha, Unani or Homoeopathy] drugs as may be sent to him by Inspectors or 
any other person or authority authorised by the Central Government or a State 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Government under the provisions 752[***] of the Act and shall furnish reports of 
the results of test or analysis in accordance with these rules. 
(2) A Government Analyst appointed under section 34F shall from time to 
time forward to the Government reports giving the results of analytical work 
and research with a view to their publication at the discretion of t he 
Government.] 
753[167. Qualifications of Inspector. —A person who is appointed an 
Inspector under section 33 G shall be a person who— 
(a) has the qualifications laid down under rule 49 and shall have undergone 
practical train ing in the manufacture of Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani or 
Homoeopathy drug, as the case may be; or 
(b) has a degree in Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani or Homoeopathy system or 
degree in Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani or Homoeopathy Pharmacy, as the case 
may be, conferred by a University or a State Government or a Statutory Faculty, 
Council or Board of Indian Systems of Medicine or Board of Homoeopathy 
recognized by the Central Government or the State Government for this 
purpose.] 
754[PART XIX 
STANDARDS OF AYURVEDIC SIDDHA AND UNANI DRUGS 
168. Standards to be complied with in manufacture for sale or for 
distribution of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs.— 
S.No Class of Drugs Standards to be complied with 
1. 
755[Drugs] included in 
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia 

The standards for identity, purity and 
strength as given in the editions of 
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India for the 
time being in force. 
2. Asavas and Aristas 
The upper limit of alcohol as self- 
generated alcohol should not exceed 12% 
v/v excepting those that are otherwise 
notified by the Central Government from 
time to time.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
 756[169. Permitted Excipients. —Permitted Excipients along with their 
standards i.e., additives, preservatives, antioxidants, flavouring agents, chelating 
agents, etc., permitted in the Indian Pharmacopoeia (IP), Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act, 1954 and Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 are permitted 
for use in Ayurveda, Siddha and Un ani drugs with the following conditions, 
namely:— 
1. The above excipients shall be used in the permissible limits as 
prescribed in the Indian Pharmacopoeia/Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act, 1954/Food Product Order/Bureau of Indian 
Standard Act, 1986 and they shall comply with the respective quality 
specifications, not exceeding any specified limits of usage therein, 
and except Hydrogenated vegetable oil. 
2. Only natural colouring agents as permitted under rule 26 of 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 will be used for 
Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs and additionally, colours 
permitted under rule 127 of Drugs and Cosmetic Rules, 1945 shall 
be used for Proprietary Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs as 
defined in sub -clause (i) of clause (h) of section 3 of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940, not exceeding any specified limits of usage 
therein. 
3. Preservatives and Colouring agents shall be mentioned on the label 
for the information of the consumer as required under rule 161 of the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Rule, 1945. 
4. Additives used in various processes and in formulating dosage forms 
shall be mentioned clearly with quantities used, in the application for 
licenses and the record for the same shall be maintained by the 
manufacturers. 
5. Manufacturers shall be responsible to ensure rationality, safety and 
quantity used of various excipients in the formulation. 
6. If any excipients or additive or preservative etc., referred in Indian 
Pharmacopoeia/Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954/Foo d 
Product Order/Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 is deleted at a 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
particular point of time, this will also be deleted simultaneously for 
the use in Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs. 
7. Following artificial sweeteners as per maximum limit indicated 
below may be used in various dosage forms of Ayurveda, Siddha, 
Unani Proprietary Medicines:— 
Artificial sweeteners may be used only in proprietary ASU products 
and the label of such products should carry a statutory warning 
stating the name and quantity of the artificial sweetener used. 
The recommended Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) of these sweeteners as 
laid down by US FDA is as follows: 
S. 
No. Sucralose Aspartame Saccharin Acesulfame K 
1. 5mg/kg 
body weight 
40 mg/kg 
body weight 
3 mg/kg 
body weight 
15 mg/kg 
body weight 

One-third of the above ADI would be permissible for use in 
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani Patent and Proprietary drugs. 
8. Any previous notification issued by the Department of AYUSH 
regarding use of excipients/additives or preservatives in Ayurve da, 
Siddha and Unani medicines stands superseded.] 
757.[170.] Error! Reference source not found.[*****] 
SCHEDULE A 
FORM 1 
(See rule 4) 
MEMORANDUM TO THE CENTRAL DRUGS LABORATORY 
Serial Number......................... 
To the Director, 
Central Drugs Laboratory................................................................. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
From.......................................................... 
I send herewith, under the provisions of section 25(4) of the Dr ugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940, sample(s) of a drug purporting to 
be..................................... for test or analysis and request that a report of the 
result of the test or analysis may be supplied to this Court. 
2. The distinguishing number on the packet is.................................................. 
3.Particulars of offence alleged............................................................................. 
4. Matter on which opinion is required................................................................ 
5. A fee of Rs...................................................has been deposited in Court. 
Date..................... Magistrate……………………….. 
758[Form 1A 
(See rule 163C) 
759[Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, 
Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh)] 
From.................................................................. 
(Full name, Designation and Postal address of the sender) 
Serial No.................................................................. 
To the Director, 
Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine, 
I send herewith under the provisions of section 11 (2)/section 25(4) and 
section 33H of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, sample(s) of a drug 
purporting to be... .....................................for test or analysis and request that a 
report of the result of the test or analysis may be supplied to this Court. 
2. The distinguishing number on the packet is................................................... 
3. Particulars of offence alleged.................................................................. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
4. Matter on which opinion is required.................................................................. 
5. A fee of Rs..................................has been deposited in Court. 
Date................................ …………………………………… 
Magistrate/Authorized Signatory.] 
FORM 2 
(See rule 6) 
CERTIFICATE OF TEST OR ANALYSIS BY THE CENTRAL DRUGS 
LABORATORY 

Certified that the samples, bearing number................ ........................purporting 
to be a sample of ............................received on .........................with 
memorandum No. ............................. dated ..........................................from 
.....................................has been tested/analysed and that the result of such 
test/analysis is as stated below. 
2. The condition of the seals on the packet on receipt was as follows:— 
*3. In the opinion of the undersigned the sample is of standard quality is not of 
standard qual ity as defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, and rules 
thereunder for the reasons given below: 
 Director 
Date.......................... Central Drugs Laboratory or other Authorised Officer 
Details of results of test or analysis with protocols of test applied 
Director 
Date............................ Central Drugs Laboratory or other Authorised Officer 
* If opinion is required on any other matter, the paragraph should be suitably 
amended. 
760[FORM 2A 
(See rule 163E) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
CERTIFICATE OF TEST OR ANALYSIS FROM THE 
761[PHARMACOPOEIA COMMISSION FOR INDIAN MEDICINE AND 
HOMOEOPATHY] OR GOVERNMENT ANALYST 

Certified that the samples, bearing number..................................purporting to be 
a sample of..................................received on..................................with 
memorandum No.................................. 
dated..................................from..................................has been tested/ analysed 
and that the result of such test/analysis is as stated below. 

2. The condition of the seals on the packet on receipt was as follows:— 
*3. In the opinion of the undersigned the sample is of standard qua lity as 
defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, or rules thereunder for the 
reasons given below. 

Or 
In the opinion of the undersigned the sample is not of standard quality as 
defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, or rules thereunder for the 
reasons given below. 
"Note.—*delete whichever is not applicable." 
(Signature of the Analyst Person-in-Charge of testing) 
Date................................... 
Place.................................. Name & Designation & Seal.................................. 
Name & Address of the Laboratory.......................] 

762[***] 

763[FORM 8 
(See rule 24) 
APPLICATION FOR LICENCE TO IMPORT DRUGS (EXCLUDING 
THOSE SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE X) TO THE DRUGS AND 
COSMETICS RULES, 1945 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
I/we* ........................................................(full address with telephone n umber, 
fax number and e -mail address) hereby apply for a licence to import drugs 
specified below manufactured by M/s........................... ...............(full address, 
with telephone number, fax, and e-mail no.) 
2. Names of the drugs to be imported: 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
3. I/we*, ............................................., enclose herewith an undertaking in 
Form 9 dated..................................signed by the manufacturer as required by 
rule 24 of the Drugs Rules, 1945. 

4. I/we, ................................................., enclose herewith a copy of Registration 
Certificate concerning the drugs to be imported in India, issued under Form 41 
of the rules, vide Registration Certificate No ..................................... Dated 
..........................issued................through M/s................................................ 
(name and full address)...................................... valid upto.......................... 

5. I/we*,............................................................, hold a valid wholesale licence 
for sale or distribution of drugs or valid licence to manufacture drugs, under the 
provisions of th e Act and rules made thereunder. A copy of the said licence is 
enclosed. 
6. A fee of.........................has been credited to Government under the Head of 
Account "0210-Medical and Public Health, 04 -Public Health, 104 -Fees and 
Fines." under the Drug s Rules, 1945—Central vide Challan No......................... 
dated........................ (attached in original) 
Signature.................................... 
Name.......................................... 
Designation................................ 
Seal/Stamp of Manufacturer's agent in India 
Place: ............................ 
Date: ............................. 
* Delete whichever is not applicable] 
764[FORM 8A 
(See rule 24) 
APPLICATION FOR LICENCE TO IMPORT DRUGS SPECIFIED IN 
SCHEDULE X TO THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS RULES, 1945 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
I/we*,......................................................, (full address with telephone n umber, 
fax number and e -mail address) hereby apply for a licence to import drugs 
specified below manufactured by M/s........................................(full address with 
telephone no, fax and e- mail no.) 
2. Names of the drugs to be imported 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
3. I/we*, ................................, enclose herewith an undertaking in Form 9 dated 
......................signed by the manufacturer as required by rule 24 of Drugs Rules, 
1945. 
4. I/we*, ................................................................, enclose herewith a copy of 
Registration Certificate concerning the drugs to be imported in India issued 
under Form 41 of the rules, vide Registration Certificate No.............................. 
Dated........................... issued through M/s................................... name and full 
address...................................... valid upto ........................ 
5. I/we*,.................................................................. hold a valid wholesale 
licence for sale or distribution of drugs or licence to manufacture drugs, under 
the provisions of the Act and rules made thereun der. A copy of the said licence 
is enclosed. 
6. A fee of.............................has been credited to Government under the Head 
of Account "0210—Medical and Public Health, 04 —Public Health, 104 —Fees 
and Fines" under the Drugs Rules, 1945 —Central vide Challan 
No......................... dated .................................. (attached in original). 
Signatures.................................... 
Name........................................... 
Designation.................................. 
Seal/Stamp of Manufacturer's agent in India 
Place......................... 
Date.......................... 
* Delete whichever is not applicable.] 

FORM 9 
(See rule 24) 
FORM OF UNDERTAKING TO ACCOMPANY AN APPLICATION 
FOR AN IMPORT LICENCE 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Whereas...........................................of..............................intends to apply for a 
licence under the Drugs Rules, 1945, for the import into India, of the drugs 
specified below manufactured by us, we .............................of 
...........................hereby give this undertaking that for the duration of the said 
licence— 
(1) the said application shall be our agent for the import of drugs into India; 
(2) we shall comply with the cond itions imposed on a licence by 765[Rules 74 
and 78] of the Drugs Rules, 1945; 
(3) we declare that we are carrying on the manufacture of the drugs mentioned 
in this undertaking at the premises specified below, and we shall from time to 
time report any change of premises on which manufacture will be carried on 
and in cases where manufacture is carried on in more than one factory any 
change in the distribution of functions between the factories; 
(4) we shall comply with the provisions of Part IX of the Drugs Rules, 1945; 
(5) every drug manufactured by us for import under licence into India shall as 
regards strength, quality and purity conform with the provisions of Chapter ID 
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, and the Drugs Rules, 1945; 
(6) we shall comply with such further requirements, if any, as may be specified 
by Rules, by the Central Government under the Act and of which the licensing 
authority has given to the licensee not less than four months' notice. 
Names of drugs and classes of drugs 
Particulars of premises where manufacture is carried on. 
Dated.............................................. 766[Signature .................................... 
Name........................................... 
Designation.................................. 
Seal/Stamp of manufacturer or on behalf of the manufacturer] 

767[FORM 10 
(See rules 23 and 27) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
LICENCE TO IMPORT DRUGS (EXCLUDING THOSE SPECIFIED IN 
SCHEDULE X) TO THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS RULES, 1945 

Licence Number.................................................. Date......................... 
1.............................(name and Full address of the 
importer)............................................ is hereby licensed to import into India 
during the period for which this licence is in force, the drugs specified below, 
manufactured by M/s..........................................................(name and full 
address) and any other drugs manufactured by the said manufacturer as may 
from time to time be endorsed on this licence. 
2. This licence shall be in force from..........................to.............................unless 
it is sooner suspended or cancelled under the said rules. 
3. Names of drugs to be imported: 
Place................................ 
Date.................................. 
LICENSING AUTHORITY 
Seal /Stamp 
Conditions of Licence 
1. A photocopy of licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part 
of the premises, and the original licence shall be produced, whenever required. 
2. Each batch o f drug imported into India shall be accompanied with a 
detailed batch test report and a batch release certificate, duly signed and 
authenticated by the manufacturer with date of testing date of release and date 
of forwarding such reports. The imported batc h of each drug shall be subjected 
to examination and testing as the licensing authority deems fit prior to its 
marketing. 
3. The licencee shall be responsible for the business activities of the 
manufacturer in India alongwith the registration holder and his authorised agent. 
4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority forthwith in writing in 
the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the 
licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three 
months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, 
a fresh licence has been taken from the licensing authority in the name of the 
firm with the changed constitution.] 
768[FORM 10A 
(See rules 23 and 27) 

LICENCE TO IMPORT DRUGS SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE X TO THE 
DRUGS AND COSMETICS RULES, 1945 

Licence Number................................ Date ................................. 
................................................................ (Name and full address of the 
importer) is hereby licensed to import into India during the period for which this 
licence is in force, the drugs specified below, manufactured by 
M/s........................................... (Name and full address) and any other drugs 
manufactured by the said manufacturer as may from time to time be endorsed 
on this licence. 
2. This licence shall be in force from ...........................to ............................. 
unless it is sooner suspended or cancelled under the said rules. 
3. Name of drugs to be imported. 
Place..................................... 
Date................................................. LICENSING AUTHORITY 
Seal/Stamp 
Conditions of Licence 
1. A photocopy of licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part 
of the premises, and the original licence produced, whenever required. 
2. Each batch of drug imported into India shall be accompanied with a 
detailed batch te st report and a batch release certificate, duly signed and 
authenticated by the manufacturer with date of testing, date of release and date 
of forwarding such reports. The imported batch of each drug shall be subjected 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
to examination and testing as the lic ensing authority deems fit prior to its 
marketing. 
3. The licencee shall be responsible for the business activities of the 
manufacturer in India alongwith the registration holder and his authorised agent. 
4. The licencee shall inform the licensing autho rity forthwith in writing in 
the event of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the 
licence. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the 
current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three 
months from the date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, 
a fresh licence has been taken from the licensing authority in the name of the 
firm with the changed constitution.] 

FORM 11 
(See rule 33) 
LICENCE TO IMPORT DRUGS FOR THE PURPOSES OF 
EXAMINATION, TEST OR ANALYSIS 

1 ....................................., of ...........................is hereby license d to import 
from .......................the drugs specified below for the purposes of examination, 
test or analysis at............................or in such other places as the licensing 
authority may from time to time authorise. 
2. This licence is subject to the conditions prescribed in the Rules under 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
3. This licence shall, unless previously su spended or revoke d, be in force 
for a period of 769[three years] from the date specified below: 
Names of drugs Quantity which may be imported 

Date........................................................ LICENSING AUTHORITY 
Seal/Stamp 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Names of drugs Quantity which may be imported 

Place.................................. LICENSING AUTHORITY 
Date......................................... Seal/Stamp 
Conditions of Licence 
1. The licence shall be displayed in the office of the Medical 
Superintendent of Government Hospital/Head of Institution of Autonomous 
Medical Institution. 
2. The licencee shall store the drugs imported under this licence under 
proper storage conditions. 
3. The drugs under this licence shall be exclusively used for the treatment 
of patients, and a record shall be maintained in this regard, by a registered 
pharmacist giving the full name(s) and address(es) of the patients, diagnosis, 
dosage schedule, total quantity of dru gs imported and issued, and shall be 
countersigned by the Medical Superintendent of the Government Hospital of 
Head of the Autonomous Medical Institution which shall be produced, on 
demand by an Inspector appointed under the Act.] 
770 [FORM 11A 
(See rule 33A) 

LICENCE TO IMPORT DRUGS BY A GOVERNMENT HOSPITAL OR 
AUTONOMOUS MEDICAL INSTITUTION FOR THE TREATMENT 
OF PATIENTS 

Licence No ……………. Date………………. 
Dr. ………………………………… Designation………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………………
of………………………………………………………………………………. 
(Name of College/Hospital/Autonomous Institution) 
is hereby licenced to import from M/s ..............................(name and full 
address) the drugs specified below for the purpose of treatment of patients for 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
the disease (name of the disease) .................... at ............................. or in such 
other places as the licensing authority may from time to time authorise. 

2. This licence shall, unless previously suspended or revoked, be in force for a 
period of one year from the date of issue specified above. 
3. Names of drugs to be imported: 
Names of drugs Quantity which may be imported 

Place.................................. LICENSING AUTHORITY 
Date......................................... Seal/Stamp 
 Conditions of Licence 
1. The licence shall be displayed in the Office of the Medical Superintendent of 
Government Hospital / Head of Institution of Autonomous Medical Institution. 

2. The licensee shall store the drugs imported under this licence under proper 
storage conditions. 
3. The drugs imported under this licence shall be exclusively used for the 
treatment of patients, and a record shall be maintained in this regard, by a 
registered pharmacist giving the fu ll name(s) and address(es) of the patients, 
diagnosis, dosage schedule, total quantity of drugs imported and issued, and 
shall be countersigned by the Medical Superintendent of the Government 
Hospital or Head of the Autonomous Medical Institution which sha ll be 
produced, on demand by an Inspector appointed under the Act.] 
FORM 12 
(See rule 34) 

APPLICATION FOR LICENCE TO IMPORT DRUGS FOR PURPOSE 
OF EXAMINATION, TEST OR ANALYSIS 

1..........................................., resident of ..................... ......by 
occupation..................... hereby apply for a licence to import the drugs specified 
below for the purpose of examination, test or analysis at ........................from 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
...............................and I undertake to comply with the condi tions applicable to 
the licence. 
771[772[ A fee of rupees ............................... has been credited to Government 
under the Head of Account "0210-Medical and Public Health, 04-Public Health, 
104-Fees and Fines under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 —Central vide 
Challan No............... dated............... (attached in original).]] 
Names of drugs Quantity which may be imported 

Place.................................. 
Date......................................................................LICENSING AUTHORITY 

773[FORM 12A 
(See rule 36, second proviso) 

APPLICATION FOR THE ISSUE OF A PERMIT TO IMPORT SMALL 
QUANTITIES OF DRUGS FOR PERSONAL USE 

1..............................resident of.......................by 
occupation............................. hereby apply for a permit to import the drugs 
specified below for personal use from I attach a prescription from a registered 
medical practitioner in regard to the need for the said drugs. 
Names of drugs Quantity which may be imported 

Date.............................................. Signature........................] 
774[FORM 12AA 
(See rule 34A) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
APPLICATION FOR LICENCE TO IMPORT SMALL QUANTITIES OF 
NEW DRUGS BY A GOVERNMENT HOSPITAL OR AUTONOMOUS 
MEDICAL INSTITUTION FOR THE TREATMENT OF PATIENTS 

I,..................................... (name) (and designation) .......................................... of 
............................................... (name of the Hospital/Autonomous Medical 
Institution) ............................................... hereby apply for a licence to i mport 
small quantities of new drugs specified below for the purpose of treatmen t of 
patients for the disease.....................................(name of the disease) 
at...........................(name and place of the hospital) and I undertake to comply 
with the conditions applicable to the licence and other provisions of the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the rules made thereunder, from time to time. 
1. A fee of rupees.............................has been credited to Government under 
the Head of Account "0210-Medical and Public Health, 04 -Medical and Public 
Health, 104 -Fees an d Fines" under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 —
Central vide Challan No.................., dated .............................., (attached in 
original). 
2. Name of new drug to be imported— 
Names of drugs Quantity which may be imported 

 Place.................................. 
Date...................................... Signature…………….. 
Name…………………….......... 
 Seal/Stamp. 

CERTIFICATE 
Certified that the drugs specified above for import are urg ently required for the 
treatment of patients suffering from............................................and that the said 
drug(s) is/ are not available in India. 
Signature....................... 
Medical Superintendent of the Government Hospital/ Head of Autonomous 
Medical Institution 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Seal/Stamp 
Place........................ 
Date...........................] 

775[FORM 12B 
(See rule 36, second proviso) 

PERMIT FOR THE IMPORT OF SMALL QUANTITIES OF DRUGS 
FOR PERSONAL USE 

...............................is hereby permitted to import from ......................... the 
drugs specified below for personal use. 
2. This permit is subject to the conditions prescribed in the Rules under the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
3. This permit sha ll, unless previously suspended or revoked, be in force 
776[till such time as the patient requires the drug as per the prescription of a 
registered medical practitioner and the permit holder shall submit details of 
drugs imported and utilised to the licensing authority on yearly basis] from the 
date specified below. 
Names of drugs Quantity which may be imported 

Date............................................ Licensing Authority.] 
FORM 13 
(See rule 46) 

CERTIFICATE OF TEST OR ANALYSIS BY GOVERNMENT 
ANALYST UNDER SECTION 25(1) OF THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS 
ACT, 1940 

1. Name of Inspector from whom received .............................................. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. Serial No. and date of Inspector's memorandum ................................... 
3. Number of sample ............................................................................... 
4. Date of receipt.......................................................................... 
5. Names of drugs purporting to be contained in the sample............................ 
6. Condition of seals on the 777[packet or on portion of sample or 
container]................. 
7. Result of test or analysis with protocols or test or anal ysis 
applied.......................... 
In the opinion of the undersigned the sample referred to above (is of 
standard/is not of standard) quality as defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1940, and Rules thereunder for the reasons given below:— 
Dated......................................... Government Analyst........................... 

778[FORM 13A 
[See rule 163(5)] 

CERTIFICATE OF TESTS OR ANALYSIS BY GOVERNMENT 
ANALYST UNDER SECTION 33H OF THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS 
ACT, 1940 

1. Name of Inspector from whom received ........................................... 
2. Serial No. and date of Inspector's memorandum......................................... 
3. Number of sample............................................................ 
4. Date of receipt ...................................................................... 
5. Names of ingredients purporting to have been used in the preparation of 
the sample.................. 
6. Condition of seal on the package................................................................... 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
7.Results of test or analysis........................................................... 
779[In the opinion of the undersigned the sample referred to above is of 
standard/is not of sta ndard quality as defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1940 and the rules made thereunder for the reasons given below:] 
Date.............................. Government Analyst...................................] 
FORM 14A 
(See rule 47) 

APPLICATION FROM A PURCHASER FOR TEST OR ANALYSIS OF 
A DRUG UNDER SECTION 26 OF THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS 
ACT, 1940 

1. Full name and address of the applicant....................................................... 
2. Occupation............................................... 
3. Name of drug purporting to be contained in the sample.............................. 
4. Name and full address of the pharmac y or concern where the drug was 
purchased……………………………….. 
5. Date on which purchased............................................................. 
6. Reasons why the drug is being submitted for test or 
analysis............................... 
780[7. A fee of rupees....................... vide Schedule B to the Drugs Rules, 
1945, has been credite d to Government under the head of account "080 -
Medical-Miscellaneous-Fees under the Drugs Rules, 1945 —Central/State"— 
vide treasury receipt attached.] 
I hereby declare that the drug being submitted for test was purchased by or 
for me. I further declare tha t the sample of the drug being sent for test or 
analysis is exactly as it was purchased and has not been tampered with in any 
way to reduce its potency. 
Date.................................................... Signed.................................. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
FORM 14B 
(See rule 47) 
CERTIFICATE OF TEST OR ANALYSIS BY GOVERNMENT 
ANALYST UNDER SECTION 26 OF THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS 
ACT, 1940 

1. Name of person from whom sample received.............................................. 
2. Date of receipt............................................................. 
3. Name of drug purporting to be contained in the sample............................... 
4. Opinion of the Government Analyst —The sample referred to above is/is 
not of standard quality as defined i n the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, and 
rules thereunder. 
Date....................................................Government Analyst................... 

781[FORM 15 
(See rules 54 and 145C) 
ORDER UNDER SECTION 22(1) (C) OF THE DRUGS AND 
COSMETICS ACT, 1940 REQUIRING A PERSON NOT TO DISPOSE 
OF STOCK IN HIS POSSESSION 

Whereas, I have reason to believe that the stocks of drugs /782[***] in your 
possession detailed below contravene the provisions of section 18 of the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Act, 1940; 
Now, therefore, I hereby require you under clause (c) of sub -section (1) of 
section 22 of the said Act, not to dispose of the said stock for a period 
of..........................days from the date of this order. 
Date.............................................................. Inspector............................. 
Details of stock of drugs/782[***]. 
Date.................................... Inspector] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
783[FORM 16 
(See rules 55 and 145B) 
RECEIPT FOR STOCK OF DRUGS 784[***] FOR RECORD, REGISTER 
DOCUMENT OR MATERIAL OBJECT SEIZED UNDER SECTION 
22(1)(C) OR (CC) OF THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 1940 

The stock of drugs or 782[***] or records, registers, documents or material 
objects, detailed below has/have this day been seized by me under the 
provisions of clause (c) or clause (cc) of sub -section (1) of section 22 of the 
Drugs and 782[***] Act, 1940 (23 of 1940), from the premises of 
.................................. situated at.............................. 

Date....................................... Inspector.......................... 
Details of drugs, 782[***], records, registers, documents or material objects 
seized. 
Date............................................ Inspector.................................] 
785[FORM 17 
(See rules 56 and 145A) 
INTIMATION TO PERSON FROM WHOM SAMPLE IS TAKEN 

To 
…………………. 
I have this day taken from the premises of .............................. situated 
at…………..samples of the drugs / 786[***] specified below for the purpose of 
test or analysis. 
Date............... Inspector........................ 
 Details of sample taken 
Date............... Inspector........................ 

787[FORM 17A 
(See rules 56A and 145AA) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
RECEIPT FOR SAMPLES OF DRUGS 788[***] TAKEN WHERE FAIR 
PRICE TENDERED THEREOF UNDER SUB-SECTION (1) OF 
SECTION 23 OF THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 1940 IS 
REFUSED 
To 
……………………. 
Whereas I, this.. ...................day of......... 789[20].........., have taken from the 
premises of situated at.................. samples of drugs/cosmetics as specified 
below:— 
Details of samples......................... 
And whereas I had offered to pay you rupees.....................as the fair price of 
the samples of drugs/cosmetics taken: 
And whereas, you have refused to accept the fair price tendered thereof; 
Now, therefore, I give you this receipt as the fair price tendered for the 
samples of the drugs/cosmetics taken by me. 
Date....................................................................Inspector....................] 
FORM 18 
(See rule 57) 
MEMORANDUM TO GOVERNMENT ANALYST 

Serial No. of Memorandum................ 
From 
To 
The Government Analyst 
The portion of sample/container described below is sent herewith for test or 
analysis under the provisions of clause (i) of sub-section (4) of section 23 of the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
The portion of sample/container has been marked by m e with the following 
mark. Details of portion of sample or container with name of 790[drug/786[***]] 
which it purports to contain— 
Date.................................................... Inspector............................ 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
791[FORM 18A 
[See rule 163(1)] 
MEMORANDUM TO GOVERNMENT ANALYST 
Serial No...................... 
From 
To 
The Government Analyst 
The portion of sample/container described below is sent herewith for test or 
analysis under the provision of section 33H of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1940. 
The portion of sample/container has been marked by me with the following 
mark. 
Details of portion of sample or container with name of ingredients from 
which it is claimed to be made. 
Date.................................................... Inspector.......................... 
792[FORM 19 
[See rule 59(2)] 

APPLICATION FOR GRANT 793[***] OF A 792[LICENCE TO SELL, 
STOCK, EXHIBIT OR OFFER FOR SALE, OR DISTRIBUTE] DRUGS 
OTHER THAN THOSE SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE X 

1. I/We, .................., hereby apply for licence to sell by wholesale/retail drugs 
specified in Schedules C and C(l) excluding those specified in Schedule X* and 
/or drugs other than those specified in Schedules C, C(l) and X to the Drugs 
Rules, 1945* and also to operate a pharmacy on the premises situated 
at............................. 
2. ! The sale and dispensing of drugs will be made under the person 
supervision of the qualified persons namely:— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
......................... (Name)....................................(Qualification). 
3. Categories of drugs to be sold. 
4. # Particulars for special storage accommodation. 
5. A fee of rupees.............................has been credited to the Government 
account under the head of account..................................... 
Date......................................................Signature............................... 
* Delete whichever is not applicable 
! To be deleted if drugs will be sold only by wholesale 
# Required only if products requiring special storage are to be sold. 

FORM 19A 
[See rule 59(2)] 
APPLICATION FOR THE GRANT 794[***] OF A RESTRICTED 
795[LICENCE TO SELL, STOCK OR EXHIBIT OR OFFER FOR SALE, 
OR DISTRIBUTE] DRUGS BY RETAIL BY 796[***l DEALERS WHO DO 
NOT ENGAGE THE SERVICE OF QUALIFIED PERSON 

1. I/We, .......................... of.......................hereby apply for a licence to sell by 
retail (i) 797[Drugs other than those specified in Schedules C, C(l) and X] on the 
premises situated at......./ 796[***] 
or (ii) Drugs specified in 798[Schedule C(l)] on the premises situated 
at..................../ Drugs specified in 798[Schedule C(l)] as vendor in the 
area........................................ 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. Sales shall be restricted to such drugs as can be sold without the supervision 
of a qualified person under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules. 
3. Names or classes of drugs proposed to be sold................................. 
*4. Particulars of the storage accommodation for the storage of Schedule C(l) 
drugs on the premises referred to above. 
!5. The drugs for sale will be purchased from the following dealers and such 
other dealers as may be endorsed on the licence by the licen sing authority from 
time to time. 
Name of the dealers ................................Licence No.............................. 
6. A fee of rupees 796[***]/#twenty has been credited to Government under 
the head of account............................... 
Date................................................................Signature.................................... 
* Delete if not required. 
! Applies only to an itinerant vendor. 
# Rupees five for itinerant vendors and applican ts from a village or town 
having a population of 5,000 or less, and rupees twenty for other restricted 
licence. 

799[FORM 19AA 
(See rule 62C) 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT 794[***] OF A 795[LICENCE TO SELL, 
STOCK OR EXHIBIT OR OFFER FOR SALE BY WHOLESALE, OR 
DISTRIBUTE] DRUGS FROM A MOTOR VEHICLE 
1. I/We,..................................., of.................................hereby apply for 
796[licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale by wholesale, or distribute] 
drugs specified in Schedules C and C(l) and/or drugs other than those specified 
in Schedule C and Schedule C(l) from the vehicle bearing registration 
No........................................... assigned under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. 
2. Categories of drugs to be sold/distributed.......................................... 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. A fee of rupees................................has been credited to Government under 
the head of account............................... 
*4. Particulars of the storage accommodation for the storage of drugs specified 
in Schedules C and C(l) on the vehicle referred to above. 
Date.............................................. Signature.................. ] 
* Delete if not required. 

FORM 19B 
(See rule 67A) 
APPLICATION FOR 795[LICENCE TO SELL, STOCK OR EXHIBIT OR 
OFFER FOR SALE, OR DISTRIBUTE] HOMOEOPATHIC 
MEDICINES 
1. I/We, ......................., of ................................hereby apply for a licence to sell 
by #wholesale/retail ................................ Homoeopathic medicine on the 
premises situated at................ 
*2. The sale and dispensing of Homoeopathic medicines shall be made under 
the person supervision of the following competent person-in-charge. 
Name........................................... 
3. A fee of rupees .................................has been credited to Government under 
the head of account ..................................... 
Date....................................................................Signature................................... 
# To be deleted if Homoeopathic medicines will be sold by wholesale. 
* Delete whichever is not applicable. 

800[FORM 19C 
[See rule 59(2)] 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT 801[***] OF A 800[LICENCE TO SELL, 
STOCK, EXHIBIT OR OFFER FOR SALE, OR DISTRIBUTE] DRUGS 
SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE X 
1. I/We,........................... of............ ........................hereby apply for a licence to 
sell by *wholesale/retail drugs specified in Schedule X to the Drugs Rules, 
1945. We operate a pharmacy on the premises, situated at......................... 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
!2. The sale and dispensing of drugs will be made under the personal 
supervision of the qualified persons mentioned below: 
(Name) ............................. (Qualification) 
3. Name of drugs to be sold. 
4. #Particulars of storage accommodation. 
5. A fee of rupees..................................has been credited to Government 
account under the head of account........................................... 
Date............................................. .Signature .........................] 
* Delete whichever is not applicable. 
! To be deleted if drugs will be sold only by wholesale. 
# Required only if products requiring special storage are to be sold.] 

FORM 20 
[See rule 61(1)] 
802[LICENCE TO SELL, STOCK OR EXHIBIT OR OFFER FOR SALE, 
OR DISTRIBUTE] DRUGS BY RETAIL OTHER THAN THOSE 
SPECIFIED IN 802[SCHEDULES C, C(l) AND X] 

1. ......................................................., is hereby 803[licensed to sell, stock or 
exhibit or offer for sale or distribute] by retail drugs other than those specified 
in 803[Schedules C, C(l) and X] of the Drugs Rules. 1945, * and to operate a 
pharmacy on the premises situated at...................subject to the conditions 
specified below and to the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and 
the rules thereunder. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
804[2. The licence unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or as needed as 
per risk based approach.] 
3. Name(s) of qualified person(s)-in-charge..................... 
4. Categories of drugs.............................. 
Name of the dealer.....................................Licence No..................................... 
Date....................... Licence No.......................... 
Licensing Authority........................ 
* Delete if not applicable. 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the 
premises open to the public. 
2. The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules thereunder for the time being in force. 
3. The licensee shall report to the licensing authority any change in the 
qualified staff incharge within one month or such change. 
4. No drug shall be sold unless such drug is purchased under case or credit 
memo from a duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed manufacturer. 
5. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unle ss, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution. 
FORM 20A 
[See rule 61(1)] 
RESTRICTED 805[LICENCE TO SELL, STOCK OR EXHIBIT OR 
OFFER FOR SALE, OR DISTRIBUTE] DRUGS BY RETAIL OTHER 
THAN THOSE SPECIFIED IN 806[SCHEDULE C, C(l) AND X] FOR 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
807[***] DEALERS WHO DO NOT ENGAGE THE SERVICES OF A 
QUALIFIED PERSON 

1.,................................................. is hereby 805[licensed to sell, stock or 
exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] on the premises situated at 807[***] 
..................................the following drugs being drugs other than those specified 
in 806[Schedules C, C(l) and X] of the Drugs Rules, 1945 subject to the 
conditions specified below and to the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics 
Act, 1940 and the rules made thereunder. 
808[2. The licence unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
Rules, 1945 sha ll be assessed not less than once in three years or as needed as 
per risk based approach.] 
3. The licensee can deal only in such drugs as can be sold without the 
supervision of a "qualified person" under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. 
809[***] 
Date.............................................. Licensing Authority............................. 
Conditions of Licence 
1. The licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the 
premises open to the public 807[***] 
2. The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules thereunder for the time being in force. 

3. No drugs shall be sold unless such drug is purchased under a case or 
credit memo from duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed manufacturer. 
4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
FORM 20B 
[See rule 61(1)] 
805[LICENCE TO SELL, STOCK OR EXHIBIT OR OFFER FOR SALE, 
OR DISTRIBUTE] BY WHOLESALE, DRUGS OTHER THAN THOSE 
SPECIFIED IN 806[SCHEDULES C, C(l) AND X] 
1,................................................ is hereby 805[licensed to sell, stock or exhibit 
or offer for sale, or distribute] by wholesale drugs other than those specified in 
806[Schedules C, C(l) and X] on the premises situated at....................subject to 
the conditions specified below and to the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics 
Act, 1940, and the rules thereunder. 
808[2. The licence unless soo ner suspended or cancelled, shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or as needed as 
per risk based approach.] 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the 
premises open to the public. 
2. The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules thereunder for the time being in force. 
810[3. (i) No drug shall be sold unless such drug is purchased under a cash or 
credit memo from a duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed manufacturer. 
(ii) No sale of any drug shall be made to a person not holding the requisite 
licence to sell, stock or exhibit for sale or distribute the drug. Provided that the 
condition shall not apply to the sale of any drug to— 
(a) an officer or authority purchasing on behalf of Government, or 
(b) a hospital, medical, educational or research institution or a registered 
medical practitioner for the purpose of supply to his patients, or] 
811[(c) a manufacturer of beverages, confectionary biscuits and ot her non -
medicinal products, where such drugs are required for processing these 
products;] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
812[* * *] 
5. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event of 
any change in the constitution of the firm opera ting under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licenc e has been 
taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution. 
813[FORM 20BB 
(See rule 62D) 
814[LICENCE TO SELL, STOCK OR EXHIBIT OR OFFER FOR SALE 
BY WHOLESALE, OR DISTRIBUTE] DRUGS OTHER THAN THOSE 
SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE C AND SCHEDULE C(l) TO DRUGS AND 
COSMETICS RULES, 1945, FROM A MOTOR VEHICLE 

1.,..................................................., is hereby 814[licensed to sell, stock or 
exhibit or offer for sale by wholesale, or distribute] drugs other than those 
specified in Schedule C and Schedule C(l) from the vehicle bearing registration 
No...................assigned under Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, subject to the 
conditions specif ied below and to the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics 
Act, 1940 and the Rules made thereunder. 
815[2. The licence unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditi ons of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or 
as needed as per risk based approach.] 
3. Categories of drugs ........................... 
Date............................................. Licence No............................................... 
Licensing Authority.................................. 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place on the vehicle. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the rules made thereunder for the time being in force. 
3. (i) No drug shall be sold by wholesale or distributed unless such drug is 
purchased under a cash or credit memo from a duly licensed dealer or a duly 
licensed manufacturer. 
(ii) No sale wholesale or distribution of any drug shall be made to a person 
not holding the requisite licence to sell, stock, or exhibit for sale or distribute 
the drug: 
Provided that the condition shall not apply to the sale of any drug to— 
(a) an officer or authority purchasing on behalf of Government, or 
(b) a hospital, medical, educational or research institution or a registered 
medical practitioner for the purpose of supply to his patients, or 
(c) a manufacturer of beverages, confectionary biscuits and other non -
medicinal products, where such drugs are required for processing these 
products; 
4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in w riting in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution. 
5. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any change in ownership of the vehicle specified in this licence within seven 
days of such change.] 

816[FORM 20C 
(See rule 67C) 
817[LICENCE TO SELL, STOCK OR EXHIBIT OR OFFER FOR SALE, 
OR DISTRIBUTE] HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES BY RETAIL 
1., ......................................................, is hereby 817[licensed to sell medicines 
by retail, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] by retail Homoeopathic 
medicines on the premises situated at ...................... subject to the conditions 
specified below and to the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and 
the Rules made thereunder. 
2. The licence shall be in force from .........................to............................ 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. Name of the competent person-in-charge. 
Date....................... Licensing Authority........................ 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the 
premises open to the public. 
2. The licensee shall comply with the provisions applicable to 
Homoeopathic medicine under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the 
Rules made thereunder for the time being in force. 
3. The licence shall report to the Licencing Authority any ch ange in the 
competent staff within one month of such change.] 
818[4. This licence authorises the sale of Homoeopathic medicines made from 
one earlier potency up to a quantity of 30 ml. at a time.] 
819[5. Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, a licensee 
shall inform the licensing authority in writing about the same and the current 
licence shall be valid only for a period of three months from the date on which 
the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken 
from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution.] 
820[FORM 20D 
(See rule 67C) 
821[LICENCE TO SELL, STOCK OR EXHIBIT OR OFFER FOR SALE, 
OR DISTRIBUTE] HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES BY WHOLESALE 

I ,........................................., is hereby 821[licensed to sell, stock or exhibit or 
offer for sale, or distribute] by wholesale Homoeopath ic medicines on the 
premises situated at....................subject to the conditions specified below and to 
the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, and the rules made 
thereunder. 
2.The licence shall be in force from................to .................... 
Date................................. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Licensing Authority..................... 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place on the premises. 
2. The licensee shall comply with the provisions as applicable to 
Homoeopathic medicines under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the 
rules made thereunder for the time being in force. 
3. No sale of any drug shall be made to a person not holding the requisite 
licence to sell, stock or exhibit for sale or distrib ute the drug. Provided that this 
condition shall not apply to the sale of any drug to (a) an authority purchasing 
on behalf of Government, or 
(b) a hospital, medical, educational or research institution or a Homoeopathic 
medical practitioner for the purpose of supply to his patients.] 
822[4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence and the 
current licence shall be valid only for a period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution.] 
823[FORM 20E 
(See rule 67EE) 
CERTIFICATE OF RENEWAL OF 824[LICENCE TO SELL, STOCK OR 
EXHIBIT OR OFFER FOR SALE, OR DISTRIBUTE] 
HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES 

1. Number of licence and date of issue....................................... 
Certified that licence No...................in Form 20C/ 20D granted on 
the............................ to.................for sale of Homoeopathic medicines at the 
premises situated at....................... has been renewed for a period 
from......................... to........................................ 
2. Name of competent person-in-charge. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Date................................................... Licensing Authority...............] 
825[FORM 20F 
[See rule 61(3)] 
LICENCE TO SELL, STOCK OR EXHIBIT FOR SALE OR 
DISTRIBUTE BY RETAIL DRUGS SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE X 

1.......................................................is hereby licensed to sell, stock or exhibit 
for sale or distribute by retail drugs specified in Schedule X to t he Drugs and 
Cosmetics Rules, 1945 on the premises situated at.................................... 
2. Names of drugs. 
826[3. The licence unless sooner suspended or cancelled shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or 
as needed as per risk based approach.] 
4. Name(s) of qualified person-in-charge. 
5. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and the provisions 
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules, made thereunder. 
Date........................... Licence No.................................................. 
Licensing authority......................... 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the 
premises open to the public. 
2. The licensee shall report to the licensing author ity any change in the 
qualified staff-in-charge within one month of such change. 
3. No drug shall be stocked or sold unless such drug has been purchased 
under cash/credit memo from a duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed 
manufacturer. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a m aximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution.] 
827[FORM 20G 
[See rule 61(3)] 
828[LICENCE TO SELL, STOCK OR EXHIBIT OR OFFER FOR SALE, 
OR DISTRIBUTE] BY WHOLESALE DRUGS SPECIFIED IN 
SCHEDULE X 

1........................................................, is hereby 828[licensed to sell, stock or 
exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] by wholesale drugs specified in Schedule 
X to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, on the premises situated 
at..................... 
2. Names of drugs ............................... 
829[3. The licence unless sooner suspended or cancelled shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or 
as needed as per risk based approach.] 
4. This licence is subject to the conditions stated below and the provisions of 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules made thereunder. 
Date.......................... Licence No............................................................ 
Licensing Authority........................ 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part o f the 
premises open to the public. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules made thereunder. 
3. No drug shall be stocked or sold unless such drug has been purchased 
under a cash or credit mem o from a duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed 
manufacturer. 
4. The licensee shall forward to the licensing authority copies of the 
invoices of sales made to the retail dealers. 
5. No sale of any drug by wholesale shall be made to a person not 
possessing the requisite licence to sell, stock or exhibit for sale or distribute the 
drugs specified in Schedule X: 
Provided that the condition shall not apply to the sale of any drug to— 
(a) an officer or authority purchasing on behalf of Government; 
(b) a hospital, medical, educational or research institution, nursing 
home, Registered Medical Practitioner for the purpose of supply to 
its/his patients, or manufacturer holding a licence in Form 25E or 
28B to manufacture the drugs containing drugs included in Schedule 
X.] 
830[The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event of 
any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence, where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes pla ce. The current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless in the meantime a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the chang ed 
constitution.] 
FORM 21 
 [See rule 61(2)] 
831[LICENCE TO SELL, STOCK OR EXHIBIT OR OFFER FOR SALE, 
OR DISTRIBUTE] BY RETAIL DRUGS SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULES C 
AND C(l) 832[EXCLUDING THOSE SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE X] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
833[1. .................................is hereby 832[licensed to sell, stock or exhibit or 
offer for sale or distribute] by retail the following categories of drugs specified 
in Schedules C a nd C(l) 832[excluding those specified in Schedule X] to the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945* and to operate a pharmacy on the premises 
situated at............subject to the conditions specified below and to the provisions 
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules thereunder.] 
834[2. The licence unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Dr ugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or 
as needed as per risk based approach."; 
3. Name(s) of qualified persons in charge............................... 
833[4. Categories of drugs..............................] 
Date …………………………….. Licence No......................................... 
Licensing Authority.............................. 
* Delete if not applicable 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the 
premises open to the public. 
2. The licensee shall report to the licensing authority any change in the 
qualified staff in charge within one month of the such change. 
835[***] 
4. If the licensee wants 1[to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or 
distribute] during the currency of the licence, additional categories of drugs 
listed in Schedules C and C(l) 2[excluding those specified in Schedule X] b ut 
not included in this licence, he should apply to the licensing authority for the 
necessary permission. This licence will be deemed to extend to the categories of 
drugs in respect of which such permission is given. This permission shall be 
endorsed on the licence by the licensing authority. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
836[5. No drug shall be sold unless such drug is purchased under a cash or 
credit memo from a duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed manufacturer.] 
6. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event of 
any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution. 
FORM 21A 
[See rule 61(2)] 
RESTRICTED 837[LICENCE TO SELL, STOCK OR EXHIBIT OR 
OFFER FOR SALE, OR DISTRIBUTE] BY RETAIL DRUGS 
SPECIFIED IN 838[SCHEDULE C(l)] 839[EXCLUDING THOSE 
SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE X] FOR 840[***] DEALERS WHO DO NOT 
ENGAGE THE SERVICES OF A QUALIFIED PERSON 

1..........................................................is hereby 837[licensed to sell, stock or 
exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] by retail on the premises s ituated at 
840[***]............................... the following drugs being drugs specified in 
838[Schedule C(l)] 839[excluding those specified in Schedule X] to the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Rules, 1945, subject to the conditions specified below and to the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, and Rules thereunder. 
841[2. The licence unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or 
as needed as per risk based approach.] 
3. Particulars of 838[Schedule C(l)] 839[excluding those specified in Schedule 
X] drugs to be sold........................... 
842[***] 
Date........................................... Licensing Authority ............... 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent and conspicuous place in a 
part of the premises open to the public 843[***]. 
844[***] 
3. The licensee shall deal only in such drugs as can be sold without the 
supervision of a "qualified person" as defined in the Explanation to sub -rule 
(15) of Rule 65 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. 
4. No drug shall be sold unless such drug is purchased under cash or credit 
memo from a duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed manufacturer. 
845[5. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution.] 
FORM 21B 
[See rule 61(2)] 
846[LICENCE TO SELL, STOCK OR EXHIBIT OR OFFER FOR SALE, 
OR DISTRIBUTE] BY WHOLESALE DRUGS SPECIFIED IN 
SCHEDULES C AND C(l) 847[EXCLUDING THOSE SPECIFIED IN 
SCHEDULE X] 

1,..............................................................., is hereby 846[licensed to sell, stock 
or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute] by wholesale on the premises situated 
at..............................the following categories of drugs specified in Schedules C 
and C(l) 847[excluding those specified in Schedule X] to the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Rules, 1945. 
Categories of drugs 
848[2. The licence unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or 
as needed as per risk based approach.] 
849[2A. The sale shall be made under the personal supervision of a competent 
person. (Name of the competent persons.)] 
3. This licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to the provisions 
of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, and the Rules thereunder. 
Date................................................ Licence No.......................... 
Licensing Authority.................................. 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place in a part of the 
premises open to the public. 
850[***] 
3. If the licensee wants to sell, stock and exhibit for sale or distribute during 
the currency of the licence additional categories of drugs listed in Schedule C(l) 
849[excluding those specified in Schedule X] but not included in this licence, he 
should apply to the licensing authority for the necessary permission. This 
licence will be deemed to extend to the categories of drugs in respect of which 
such permission is given. This permission shall be endorsed on the licence by 
the licensing authority. 
851[4. (i) No drug shall be sold unless such drug is purchased under a cash or 
credit memo from a duly licensed dealer or a duly licensed manufacturer. 
(ii) No sale of any drug shall be made for purposes of resale to a person 
not holding the requisite licence to sell, stock or exhibit for sale or 
distribute the drug:] 
Provided that this condition shall not apply to the sale of any drug to— 
(a) an officer or authority purchasing on behalf of Government, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) a hospital, medical, educational or research institution or a 
registered medical practitioner for the purpose of supply to his patients, 
or 
852[(c) a manufacturer of hydrogenated vegetable oils, beverages, 
confectionery and other non-medicinal products, where such drugs are 
required for processing these products.] 
853[5. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the Lisensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution.] 

854[FORM 21BB 
(See rule 62D) 
LICENCE TO SELL BY WHOLESALE OR TO DISTRIBUTE DRUGS 
SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE C AND SCHEDULE C(l) TO THE DRUGS 
AND COSMETICS RULES, 1945 FROM A MOTOR VEHICLE 

1,.................................................., is hereby licensed to sell by whole sale, or 
to distribute drugs specified in Schedule C and Schedule C(l) from the vehicle 
bearing registration No . .................. assigned under Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 
subject to the conditions specified below to the provisions of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the rules made thereunder. 
855[2. The licence unless sooner suspend ed or cancelled, shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in thr ee years or 
as needed as per risk based approach.] 
3. Categories of drugs ................................. 
Date................................................... Licence No............................... 
Licensing Authority................. 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence shall be displayed in a prominent place on the vehicle. 
2. No drugs to which this licence applies shall be sold by wholesale or 
distributed unless the precautions as are published by the licensing authority 
from time to tim e in the Official Gazette have been observed throughout the 
period during which it has been in the possession of the licensee. 
3. If the licensee wants to sell by wholesale or distribute during the 
currency of the licence additional categories of drugs listed in Schedule C and 
Schedule C(l) not included in this licence, he shall apply to the licensing 
authority for necessary permission. This licence shall be deemed to extend to 
the categories of drugs in respect of which such permission is given. This sh all 
be endorsed on the licence by the licensing authority. 
4. (i) No drug shall be sold by wholesale or distributed unless such drug is 
purchased under a cash or credit memo from a duly licensed manufacturer. 
(ii) No sale by wholesale or distribution cf any drug shall be made for the 
purpose of resale to a person, not holding the requisite licence to sell, 
stock or exhibit for sale or distribute the drugs: 
Provided that this condition shall not apply to the sale of any drug to— 
(a) an officer or autho rity purchasing on behalf of the Government, 
or 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) a hospital, medical, educational or research institution or a 
registered medical practitioner for the purpose of supply to his 
patients, or 
(c) a manufacturer of hydrogenated vegetable oils, beverag es, 
confectionery and other non-medicinal products, where such drugs are 
required for processing their products. 
5. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under t he licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution. 
6. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the ownership of the vehicle specified in this licence within 
seven days of such change.] 
FORM 21C 856[***] 
FORM 21CC 857[***] 
FORM 22 858[***] 
FORM 23 858[***] 
FORM 24 
(See rule 69) 
APPLICATION FOR THE GRANT 859[***] OF A 860[LICENCE TO 
MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION OF] DRUGS 
OTHER THAN THOSE SPECIFIED IN 861[SCHEDULES C, C(l) AND X] 

1. I/We,................................, of..........................hereby apply for the 862[grant] 
of a licence to manufacture on the premises situated at ...........................the 
following drugs being drugs other than those specified in 860[Schedules C, C(l) 
and X] to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. 
2. Name of drugs categorized according to Schedule M. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. Names, qualifications and experience of technical staff employed for 
manufacture and testing. 
4. A fee of rupees.................................has been credited to Government under 
the head of account........................... 
Date.................................................. Signature........................ 
Note.—The application should be accompanied by a plant of the premises. 

FORM 24A 
(See rule 69A) 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT 859[***] OF A LOAN 860[LICENCE TO 
MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION OF] DRUGS 
OTHER THAN THOSE SPECIFIED IN 861[SCHEDULES C, C(l) AND X] 
1. I/We*,................................. of ! ..........................hereby apply for the 
862[grant] of a licence to manufacture on the premises situated at 
...........................C/o# ...............the undermentioned drugs, other than thos e 
specified in 861[Schedules C, C(1 ) and X] to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 
1945. 
Names of drugs (each substance to be separately specified). 
2. The names, qualificat ions and experience of the expert staff actually 
connected with the manufacture and testing of the specified products in the 
manufacturing premises. 
3. I/We enclose 
(a) A true copy of a letter from me/us to the manufacturing concern 
whose manufacturing capacity is intended to be utilised by me/us. 

(b) A true copy of a letter from the manufacturing concern that they 
agree to lend the services of their expert staff, equipment and premises for 
the manufacture of each item required by me/us and that t hey will analyse 
every batch of finished product and maintain the register of raw materials, 
finished products and reports of analysis separately in this behalf. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(c) Specimens of labels, cartons of the products proposed to be 
manufactured. 

(4) A fee of r upees...........................has been credited to Government under the 
head of account............ 

Date........................................ Signature.................... 
* Enter here the name of the proprietor, partners or Ma naging Director as 
the case may be. 
! Enter here the name of the applicant firm and the address or the principal 
place of business 
# Enter here the name and address of the manufacturing concern where 
the manufacture will be actually carried out and also the licence number 
under which the latter operates. 

863[FORM 24B 
(See rule 69) 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT 864[***] OF A LICENCE TO REPACK 
FOR SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF DRUGS, BEING DRUGS OTHER 
THAN THOSE SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULES C AND C(l) 
865[EXCLUDING THOSE SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE X] 
1. I/We, ............................., of......................hereby apply for 866[grant] of a 
licence to repack the following drugs at the premises situated at...................... 
2. Names of the drugs to be repacked. 
3. Name, qualification and experience of competent staff..................... 
4. A fee of rupees forty has been credited to Government under the head of 
account...................... 
Date..................................................... .Signature of applicant.................] 
Note.—The application shall be accompanied by a plan of the premises. 
867[FORM 24C 
(See rule 85B) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT 868[OR RENEWAL] OF A 869[LICENCE 
TO MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION OF] 
HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES OR A LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE 
POTENTISED PREPARATIONS FROM BACK POTENCIES BY 
LICENSEES HOLDING LICENCE IN FORM 20C 

870[1. I/We, ............................., of......................holder of licence No............in 
Form 20C hereby apply for 871[grant or renewal] of l icence to manufacture the 
undermentioned Homoeopathic Mother Tincture/Potentised and other 
preparations on the premises situated at.............................. 
Names of the Homoeopathic preparations............................ 
(Each item to be separately specified). 
2. Names, qualifications and experience of technical staff employed for 
manufacture and testing of Homoeopathic medicines. 
3. A fee of rupees....................................has been credited to Government 
under head of account.................................................................................. 
Date................................................ Signature..................] 
Note.—(1) Delete whichever portion is not applicable. 
(2) The application should be accompanied by a plan of the premises. 

872[FORM 24D 
(See rule 153) 
APPLICATION FOR THE GRANT OF A LICENCE TO 
MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OF AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA OR UNANI 
DRUGS 
1. I/W e ........................................... of ............. ...............hereby apply for the 
grant of a licence to manufacture Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs on the 
premises situated at.................................................................... 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. Names of drugs categorized according to Schedule T to be manufactured 
(with details) 
3. Names, qualifications and experience of technical staff employed for 
manufacture and testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani 
drugs............................................. 
4. A fee of rupees .................... ........... has been credited to the Government 
under the head of account .................................... and the relevant Treasury 
Challan/online transaction slip is enclosed herewith. 
Date............................................... Signature...................................... 
(Applicant) 
Note.—The application should be accompanied by a Plan of the premises.] 

873[FORM 24E 
(See rule 153A) 
APPLICATION FOR THE GRANT OF A LOAN LICENCE TO 
MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OF AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA OR UNANI 
DRUGS 
1. I/We* ........................., of!.........................hereby apply for the grant of a loan 
licence to manufacture Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs on the premises 
situated at........................C/o#............................... 
2. Names of drugs categorized according to Schedule T to be manufactured 
(with details). 
3. The names, qualifications and experience of technical staff actually 
connected with the manufacture and testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani 
drugs in the manufacturing premises. 
4. I/We* enclose. 
(a) A true copy of a letter from me/us to the manufacturing concern 
whose manufacturing capacity is intended to be utilized by me/us. 
(b) A true copy of a letter from the manufacturing concern that they 
agree to lend the services of their competent technical staff, equipment 
and premises for the manufacture of each item required by me/us and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
that they shall maintain the registers of raw materials and finished 
products separately in this behalf. 
(c) Specimen of labels, cartons of the drugs proposed to be 
manufactured. 
5. A fee of Rs......................................................has been credited to 
Government under the head of account .................................... and the relevant 
Treasury Challan/online transaction slip is enclosed herewith. 
Date............................... Signature.............................. 
* Enter here the name of the proprietor, partners or Managing Director as the 
case may be. ! Enter here the name of the applicant firm and the address or the 
principal place of 
business. 
# Enter here the name and address of the manufacturing concern where the 
manufacture will be actually carried out and also the licence number under 
which the latter operates.] 

874[FORM 24E-1 
(See rule 153B) 
APPLICATION FOR THE CERTIFICATE OF GOOD 
MANUFACTURING PRACTICES FOR AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA OR 
UNANI DRUGS MANUFACTURING UNITS 
l.I/We..............................of.........................................hereby apply for the grant 
of a Certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices for Ayurvedic, Siddha or 
Unani drugs manufacturing on the premises situated 
at................................................ 
2. A fee of rupees ............................... has been credited to the Government 
under the head of account .................................... and the relevant Treasury 
Challan/online transaction slip is enclosed herewith. 
Date....................................................... Signature..................................... 
(Applicant) 
Note.—The application should be accompanied by a Plan of the premises.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
875[FORM 24F 
(See rule 69) 
APPLICATION FOR THE GRANT 876]***] OF A 877[LICENCE TO 
MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION OF] DRUGS 
SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE X AND NOT SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULES 
C AND C(l) 

1. I/We, ............................., of.........................hereby apply for the 878[grant] of 
licence to manufacture on premises situated at ...........................the 
undermentioned drugs, specified in Schedule X to the Drugs and Cosmetics 
Rules, 1945. 
2. Names of drugs. 
3. Names, qualifications and experience of technical sta ff employed for 
manufacture and testing. 
4. A fee of rupees.................................has been credited to Government 
account under the head of account........................... 
Date........................................ Signature................................ 
Designation............................] 

FORM 25 
(See rule 70) 
877LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR 
DISTRIBUTION OF] DRUGS OTHER THAN THOSE SPECIFIED IN 
879[SCHEDULES C, C(1) AND X] 

Number of licence and date of issue.................................. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
I..........................is hereby licensed to manufacture the following categories of 
drugs being drugs other than those specified in 879[Schedules C, C(l) and X] to 
the Drugs Rules, 1945, on the premises situated at...........................under the 
direction and supervision of the following 880[Competent Technical Staff]:— 
(a) 880[Competent Technical Staff] (Names).................................................. 
(b) Names of Drugs (each item to be separately specified)............................. 
2. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing and storage 
for sale by the licensee of the drugs manufactured under the licence, subject to 
the conditions applicable to licence for sale. 
881[3. The licence unless sooner suspended or cancelled shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or 
as needed as per risk based approach.] 
4. The licence is subject t o the conditions stated below and to such other 
conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Date................................ Signature.................................. 
Designation............................. 
882[*Licencing Authority/ "Central Licence Approving.] 
* Delete whichever is not applicable. 

Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence 883[***] shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be 
produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. Any change in the 884[Competent Technical Staff] named in the licence 
shall be forthwith reported to the licensing authority. 
3. If the licensee wants to manufacture for sale additional items of drugs 
not included above, he should apply to the licensing authority for the necessary 
endorsement as provided in rule 69(5). This licence will be deemed to extend to 
the categories so endorsed. 
4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution. 
FORM 25A 
(See rule 70A) 
LOAN 885[LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR 
DISTRIBUTION OF] DRUGS OTHER THAN THOSE SPECIFIED IN 
886[SCHEDULES C, C(l) AND X] 

1. Number of licence and date of issue.................................... 
2.........................of........................is hereby granted a loan licence to 
manufacture the following drugs being drugs other than those specified in 
886[Schedules C, C(l) and X] to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, on the 
premises situated at .......................C/o .....................under the direction and 
supervision of the following 887[Competent Technical Staff]:— 
(a) 887[Competent Technical Staff] (Names)............................................ 
(b) Names of drugs ....................................................... 
3. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing by the 
licensee and storage for sale by the licensee of the drug manufactured under the 
licence subject to the conditions applicable to licences for sale. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
888[4. The licence, unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the co mpliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or 
as needed as per risk based approach.] 
5. The licenc e is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other 
conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Date................................................... Signature.......................... 
 Designation....................... 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence and 889[***] shall be kept on the approved premises and 
shall be produced on the requ est of an Inspector appointed un der the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
2. Any change in t he 887[Competent Technical Staff] named in the licence 
shall be forthwith reported to the licensing authority. 
3. If the licensee wants to undertake during the currency of the licence to 
manufacture for sale additional drugs he should apply to the licensing authority 
for the necessary endorsement to the licence as provided in Rule 69A. This 
licence will be deemed to extend to the drugs so endorsed. 
4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any changes in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. 
Where any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence 
shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three month s from the 
date on which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence 
has been taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the 
changed constitution.] 

890[FORM 25B 
(See rule 70) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
LICENCE TO REPACK FOR SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF DRUGS 
BEING DRUGS OTHER THAN THOSE SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULES C 
AND C(l) 891[EXCLUDING THOSE SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE X] 

Number of licence and date of issue................... 
1.........................of.........................is hereby granted a licence to repack the 
following drugs for sale or distribution on the premises situated 
at.........................under the supervision of the following competent staff : 
(a) Name of drugs to be repacked. 
(b) Names of competent staff. 
892[2. The licence unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or as needed as 
per risk based approach.] 
3. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing by the 
licensee and storage for sale by the licensee of the drugs repacked under the 
licence subject to conditions applicable to licence for sale. 
4. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other 
conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Date...................................................... Signature.................................. 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence 893[***] shall be kept on the licensed premises and sh all be 
produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
2. Any change in the competent staff named in the licence shall be 
forthwith reported to the licensing authority. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. If the licensee wants to repack for sale or distribution additional items 
he should apply to the licensing authority for the necessary endorsement to this 
licence. The licence shall be deemed to extend to only those items so endorsed. 
4. The drugs repacked under this licence shall bear o n their label, apart 
from other particulars required by these Rules, the name and address of the 
licensee and the number of the licence under which the drug is repacked 
preceded by the words 'Rpg. Lic. No.' 
5. The licensee shall inform the licensing author ity in writing in the event of 
any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from t he date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licensing authority in tire name of the firm with the changed 
constitution.] 
894[FORM 25C 
(See rule 85D) 
895[ LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR 
DISTRIBUTION OF] HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES 

Number of licence and date of issue............................................. 
1.896[I, ..................., of ......................... *who holds a licence in Form 20C is 
hereby licensed to manufacture the under mentioned Homoeopathic Mother 
Tincture/potentised and other preparations on the premises situated 
at.................... under the direction and supervision of following techn ical 
staff:— 
Names of the Homoeopathic preparations. 
(Each item to be separately specified) 
Names of the Technical Staff..........................................................] 
2. The licence shall be in force from........................ to...................... 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other 
conditions as may be specified in the rules for the time being in force under the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Date................................................ Signature.................................... 
 Designation................................ 
* Delete the words 'who holds a licence in Form 20C' in the case this is not 
applicable. 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be kept on the 
premises and shall be produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
2. Any change in the technical staff named in th e licence shall be forthwith 
reported to the licensing authority. 
897[3. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licen sing authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution.]] 
898[FORM 25D 
(See rule 154) 
LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OF AYURVEDIC, 
SIDDHA OR UNANI DRUGS 

No. of Licence and date of issue...................................................................... 
1.......................................... is/are hereby licenced to manufacture the 
following Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs on the premises situated 
at......................................... ......................................................... under the 
direction and supervision of the following competent technical staff:— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) Competent Technical staff (Names). 
(b) Names of drugs categorized as per Schedule T (each item to be separately 
specified) with specific Product Code/QR Code for each approved drug. 
2. The licence shall be in force from.............................................. 
3. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other 
conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Date ................................ Signature................... 
 Designation............ 
Conditions of Licence 
1. Any change in the Technical staff named in the licence shall be 
forthwith reported to the Licensing Authority. 
2. This licence shall be deemed to extend to such additional items as the 
licencee may intimate to the Licensing Authority from time to time, and as may 
be endorsed by the Licensing Authority. 
3. The licencee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution. 
4. The licence unless sooner suspended or cancelled shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in five years or as needed as per 
risk based approach. 
5. The licence is issued only after fulfillment of the requirements of Good 
Manufacturing Practices (GMP) of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs as laid 
down in Schedule T of the Drugs Rules, 1945.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 

899[FORM 25E 
(See rule 154A) 
LOAN LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE FOR SALE AYURVEDIC, 
SIDDHA OR UNANI DRUGS 

1. Number of Licence..............................date of issue..................................... 
2........................................................... of......................... ................... is 
hereby granted a loan licence to manufacture for sale Ayurvedic, Siddha, or 
Unani drugs, on the premises situated at .................................................... 
C/o.....................................................under the direction and supervision of the 
following expert technical staff: 
(a) Expert Technical staff (Names)..................................... 
(b) Names of drugs categorized as per Schedule T (each item to be separately 
specified) with specific Product Code/QR Code for each approved drug. 
3. The licence shall be in force from.................................... 
4. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other 
conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
 Date……………… Designation…………… 
 Signature ................... 
Conditions of Licence 
1. Any change in the technical staff named in the licence shall be forthwith 
reported to the Licensing Authority. 
2. This licence shall be deem ed to extend to such additional items as the 
licencee may intimate to the Licensing Authority from time to time, and as may 
be endorsed by the Licensing Authority. 
3. The licencee shall inform the Licensing Authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the Licensing Authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution. 
4. The licence unless sooner suspended or cancelled shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in five years or as needed as per 
risk based approach.] 
900[FORM 25F 
(See rule 70) 
901[LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR 
DISTRIBUTION OF] DRUGS SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE X AND NOT 
SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULES C AND C(l) 

1.......................of...................................is hereby licensed to ma nufacture at 
the premises situated at..............................the following drugs specified in 
Schedule X to the Drugs Rules, 1945. 
2. Name of drugs. 
3. Names of approved 902[Competent Technical Staff]. 
4. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing and storage 
for sale by the licensee of the drugs manufactured under the licence subject to 
the conditions applicable to licence for sale. 
5. The licence shall be in force from......................to........................ 
6. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to other 
conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Date of issue…………………..... Signature................... 
Licence No…………….. Designation……………… 
903 [Licensing Authority..............] 
*Central Licence Approving Authority] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
* Delete whichever is not applicable. 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence 904[***] shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be 
produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
2. If the licensee wishes to undertake during the currency of the licence the 
manufacture of any drug specified in Schedule X not included above, he should 
apply to the licensing authority for the necessary endorsement to this licence. 
This licence shall be deemed to extend to only those so endorsed. 
3. Any change in the 905[Competent Technical Staff] shall be forthwith 
reported to the licensing authority. 
4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution. 
906[5. The licence, unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or 
as needed as per risk based approach.] 
6. The licensee shall not manufacture drugs covered by this licence for use as 
'Physician's Samples'.] 
FORM 26 907[***] 
FORM 26A 908[***] 
FORM 26B 909[***] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 

FORM 26C 
(See rule 85G) 
CERTIFICATE OF RENEWAL OF LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE 
FOR SALE OF HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICINES 

1. Certified that licence No...........................granted on 
the.............................to............... for the manufacture for sale of the 
Homoeopathic mother tinctures/potentised preparations at the premises situated 
at...................has been renewed for a period from the ....................to........... 
2. Names of technical staff....................................................................... 
910[3. Names of the drugs (each item to be separately specified)......................... 
Date............................................................Signature .................................... 
Designation................................. 
911[FORM 26D 
Error! Reference source not found.1344.Error! Reference source not 
found.1344.Error! Reference source not found.1344.Error! Reference source 
not found.1344.Error! Reference source not found.1344.[*****] 

913[FORM 26E 
Error! Reference source not found.Error! Reference source not 
found.1344.[******] 

914[FORM 26E-I 
(See rule 157B) 
CERTIFICATE OF GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES (GMP) 
TO MANUFACTURER OF AYURVEDA, SIDDHA OR UNANI DRUGS 
Certified that manufacturing unit licensee, namely................................. 
situated at....................State.......................... Licence No................................... 
comply with the requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices of Ayurveda -

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Siddha-Unani drugs as laid down in Schedule T of the Drugs and Cosmetics 
Rules, 1945. 
This certificate is valid for a 915[period of five years and the Good 
Manufacturing Practices (GMP) is valid for the various dosage forms or 
Rasaushadhis, as follows:] 
Dated........................................................ Signature......................... 
Place.......................................................... Designation...................... 
Licensing Authority for 
Ayurveda/ Siddha/Unani Drugs.] 

916[FORM 26E2-I 
(See rule 158C) 
State Drug Controller or Licensing Authority for Ayurveda, Siddha and 
Unani Medicines Name of the State or Union territory........ 
Free Sale Certificate 
It is certified that M/s........(Name of the company)........situated 
at..........(Address) ......................is holding valid Ayurvedic/Siddha/Una ni Drug 
Manufacturing Licence Number..............and certificate of Good Manufacturing 
Practices for the State or Union territory of ...... 
It is also certified that the manufacturing plant situated 
at...........(Address)........ in which the Ayurvedic or Unani or Sidhha products are 
manufactured, conforms to the requirement of Good Manufacturing Practices 
and is subjected to inspection as per rules. 
The firm has been permitted under Licence Number...........to manufacture 
and market the following products (attach list of products, if multiple) freely for 
sale in India under the provisions of the Drugs and Cosemtics Act, 1940 and the 
rules thereunder. 
(i) ............... 
(ii) ............... 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(iii) ................ 
Date :.............. (Seal of issuing Officer) ............... 
(Signature and Name) 
State Drug Controller/Licensing Authority 
Address............................................ 
Name of State or Union territory.............] 

917[FORM 26E2-II 
(See rule 158C) 
State Drug Controller or Licensing Authority for Ayurveda, Siddha and 
Unani Medicines Name of the State or Union territory........ 
Free Sale Certificate 
It is certified that M/s........(Name of the company)........situated 
at..........(Address) ...................... is holding valid Ayurvedic/Siddha/Unani Drug 
Manufacturing Loan Licence Number .................... and the valid certificate of 
Good Manufacturing Practices for the State or Union territory of...... 
It is also certified that the manufacturing pla nt situated 
at...........(Address)........ in which the Ayurvedic or Unani or Sidhha products are 
manufactured, conforms to the requirement of Good Manufacturing Practices 
and is subjected to inspection as per rules. 
The firm has been permitted under Loan Licence Number...........to 
manufacture and market the following products (attach list of products, if 
multiple) freely for sale in India under the provisions of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the rules thereunder. 
(i) ........................ 
(ii) ........................ 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(iii) ......................... 
Date:.......................... (Seal of issuing Officer):............................ 
(Signature and Name) 
State Drug Controller/Licensing Authority 
Address................................................... 
Name of State or Union territory..................] 

918[FORM 26 E3 
(See rule 158C) 
State Drug Controller or Licensing Authority for Ayurveda, Siddha and 
Unani Medicines Name of the State or Union territory........ 
Non-Conviction Certificate 

It is certified that M/s.............. (Name of the company)........situated at ......... . 
(Registered Address) ...................... is holding valid Ayurvedic/Siddha/Unani 
Drug Manufacturing Lic ence Number...............in Form 25D/25E and valid 
certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices/valid Good Manufacturing 
Practices certificate of principal or original manufacturer for the State or Union 
territory of............ 
As per the records of the S tate Drug Controller or Licensing Authority, as it 
may be, and affidavit (Annexure I) given by the company, the firm has not been 
convicted under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the rules 
thereunder in the State or Union territory of.... ...., during the last three years of 
the issuing of this certificate. 
This certificate shall be valid only for one year from the date of issue. 
Date :.............................. (Seal of issuing Officer) ......................... 
(Signature and Name) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
State Drug Controller/Licensing Authority for 
Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Medicines. 
Address ......................................................... 
Name of State or Union territory........................ 

ANNEXURE-1 
(Proforma of Affidavit to be executed on appropriate non-judicial stamp 
paper of minimum value and attested by Notary Public) 

I, ........................ S/O ......................... age ................... working as ...................... 
of ....................... (Name and a ddress of the company) .................. from 
.................. to .................. do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under: 
1. That I, in the capacity of Authorized Signatory of ............ (name and 
address of the company) .........., am d uly competent to depose and verify the 
present affidavit. 
2. That I apply for Non-conviction Certificate on behalf of M/s ........................ 
3. That I declare that I am aware of the details of my organization and day to 
day activities from .............to ............. 
4. That I hereby undertake that the Non -Conviction Certificate, if issued, will 
be utilized for the bona fide purpose only. 
5. I declare that the aforesaid firm is not convicted under the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940 and rules thereunder during the last three years. 
6. That it is my true statement. 
Signature of Deponent 
Verification 
Verified at ............. (Place and State) ..............today on this ................ day of 
..... (month)....(Year) ..... that the conten ts of the above affidavit are true to my 
Knowledge and belief and no part of it is false and nothing has been concealed 
there from. 
Signature of Deponent 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Witness with Address 
1..................................... 
2……………………….. 

919[FORM 26 E4] 
1345.[*****] 

920[FORM 26 E5] 
1345.Error! Reference source not found.Error! Reference source not 
found.Error! Reference source not found.Error! Reference source not 
found.[*****] 

FORM 26F 921[***] 

922[FORM 26G 
(See rule 122F) 
CERTIFICATE OF RENEWAL OF LICENCE TO OPERATE A 
923[BLOOD CENTRE] FOR PROCESSING OF WHOLE HUMAN 
BLOOD AND/OR* FOR PREPARATION FOR SALE OR 
DISTRIBUTION OF ITS COMPONENTS 
1. Certified that licence No.................granted on ....................to M/s...............for 
the operation of a 924[Blood Centre] for processing of whole human blood 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
and/or for preparation of its components at the premises situated at 
....................is hereby renewed with effect from.......to................ 
2. Name(s) of items: 
1......................... 
2............................... 
3. Name(s) of Competent Technical staff............................. 
1............................ 
2............................. 
Date............................... Signature ........................................ 
Name and Designation.................... 
Licensing Authority/ 
Central Licence Approving Authority........................] 
* Delete, whichever is not applicable 

FORM 26H 925[***] 

926[FORM 26-I 
(See rule 122-1) 
CERTIFICATE OF RENEWAL OF LICENCE FOR MANUFACTURE 
OF BLOOD PRODUCTS 
Certified that licence No......................granted on .................to M/s........... ....... 
for manufacture of blood products at the premises situated at ................is hereby 
renewed with effect from................to................ 
2. Name(s) of item(s): 
1..................... 
2..................... 
3. Name(s) of Competent Technical staff............................... 
(a) responsible for manufacturing (b) responsible for testing 
1...................................................... 1............................... 
2.............................................. 2............................... 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 

Date............................. Signature.......................................... 

Name and Designation................ 
Licensing Authority/ 
Central Licence Approving Authority] 

927[FORM 26J 
[See rules 122G, 122H, 122-1, 122P] 
CERTIFICATE OF RENEWAL OF LICENCE FOR COLLECTION, 
PROCESSING, TESTING, STORAGE, BANKING AND RELEASE OF 
UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD STEM CELLS 

Certified that licence number...............granted on.................to 
M/s........................for collection, processing, testing, s torage, banking and 
release of umbilical cord blood stem cells at the premises situated at.............is 
hereby renewed with effect from .................... to ............ 
1. Name(s) of competent Technical Staff: 
1……………. 
2………….. 
3…………. 
Signature............................ 
Designation........................ 
Licensing Authority 
Date.. 
…………………………………. 
Central Licence Approving Authority] 

FORM 26J 
928 [***] 

FORM 27 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT 929[***] OF A 930[LICENCE TO 
MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION OF] DRUGS 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULES C AND C(l) 931[EXCLUDING THOSE 
SPECIFIED IN 932[PART XB AND] SCHEDULE X] 

1. I/We, .................... hereby apply for the 933[grant] of a licence to 
manufacture on the premises situated at .............the undermentioned drugs, 
being drugs specified in Schedules C and C(l), 931[excluding those specified in 
931[Part XB and] Schedule X] to the Drugs Rules, 1945, 
Name of drugs.....................................(each item to be separately specified). 
2. The names, qualifications and experience of the exp ert staff responsible 
for the manufacture and testing of the above-mentioned drugs: 
(a) Name(s) of staff responsible for test.......................................... 
(b) Name(s) of staff responsible for manufacture.......................... 
3. The premises and plan are ready for inspection/will be ready for inspection 
on.......................... 
4. A fee of rupees ............................and an inspection fee of rupees 
.......................has been credited to Government under the head of 
account............................... 
Date................................................................Signature............................ 
Designation......................... 
Note.—The application shall be accompanied by a plan of the premises. 

FORM 27A 
(See rule 75 A) 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT 929[***] OF A LOAN 930[LICENCE TO 
MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION OF] DRUGS 
SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULES C AND C(l) 931[EXCLUDING THOSE 
SPECIFIED IN 932[PART XB AND] SCHEDULE X] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1. I/We*, ..........................., of .............................hereby apply for the 
933[grant] of loan licence to manufacture on the pr emises situated at 
.................................. C/o # .......................... the undermentioned drugs, being 
drugs specified in Schedules C and C(l) 931[excluding v those specified in 
932[Part XB and] Schedule X] to the Drugs Rules, 1945. 
Name of drugs (each substance to be separately specified). 
2. The names, qualifications and experience of the expert staff actually 
connected with the manufacture and testing the specified products in the 
manufacturing premises. 
(a) Name(s) of expert staff responsible for manufacture .................... 
(b) Name(s) of expert staff responsible for testing.................................... 
3. I/We enclose 
(a) A true copy of a letter from me/us to th e manufacturing concern whose 
manufacturing capacity is intended to be utilised by me/us. 
(b) A true copy of a letter from the manufacturing concern that they agree to 
lend the services of their expert staff, equipment and premises for the 
manufacture of each item required by me/us and that they will analyse ever}' 
batch of finished products and maintain the registers of raw materials, finished 
products and reports of analysis separately on this behalf. 
(c) Specimens of labels, cartons of the products proposed to be manufactured. 
4. A fee of rupees........................has been credited to Government under the 
head of account........................ 
Date..................................................................Signature................................ 
* Enter here name of the proprietor, partners or Managing Director as the case 
may be. 
! Enter here name of the applicant firm and the address of the principal place of 
business. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
# Enter here the name and address of the manufacturing concer n where the 
manufacture will be actually carried out and also the licence number under 
which the letter operates. 

934[FORM 27B 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT 935[***] OF A 936[LICENCE TO 
MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION OF] DRUGS 
SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULES C, C(l) AND X 
1. I/We, ............................., of..............................hereby apply for the 937[***] 
of a licence to manufacture on t he premises situated at ........................the 
undermentioned drugs, specified in Schedules C, C(l) and X to the Drugs Rules, 
1945. 
2. Names of drags. 
3. The names, qualifications and experience of the expert staff responsible for 
the manufacture and testing of the abovementioned drugs. 
(a) Name(s) of staff responsible for test. 
(b) Name(s) of staff responsible for manufacture. 
4. The premises and plant* are ready for inspection/will be ready for 
inspection on...................... 
5. A fee of rupees......................and an inspection fee of 
rupees.............................has been credited to the Government under the head of 
account........................... 
Date..............................................................Signature............................... 
The application shall be accompanied by a plan of the premises.] 
* Delete whichever is not applicable. 
938[FORM 27C 
(See rule 122F) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT/RENEWAL* OF LICENCE FOR THE 
OPERATION OF A 939[BLOOD CENTRE] FOR PROCESSING OF 
WHOLE BLOOD AND/OR* PREPARATION OF BLOOD 
COMPONENTS 
1. I/We,............................, of M/s............................hereby apply for the grant of 
licence/ renewal of licence number........ ..............dated.................to operate a 
940[Blood Centre], for processing of whole blood and /or* for preparation of its 
components on the premises situated at.................... 
2. Name(s) of the item(s) : 
1. 
2. 
3. The name(s), qualification and experience of competent Technical Staff 
are as under: 
(a) Name(s) of Medical Officer. 
(b) Name(s) of Technical Supervisor. 
(c) Name(s) of Registered Nurse. 
(d) Name(s) of 941[Blood Centre] Technician. 
4. The premises and plant are ready for inspection/will be ready for inspection 
on................ 
5. A licence fee of rupees..................and an inspection fee of 
rupees................has been credited to the Government unde r the Head of 
Account...................(receipt enclosed). 
Signature............................ 
Dated.............................. Name and Designation...................... 
* Delete whichever is not applicable. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Note 1. The application shall be a ccompanied by a plan of the premises, list of 
machinery and equipment for collection, processing, storage and testing of 
whole blood and its components, memorandum of association/constitution of 
the firm, copies of certificate relating to educational quali fications and 
experience of the competent technical staff and documents relating to ownership 
or tenancy of the premises. 
Note 2 . A copy of the application together with the relevant enclosures shall 
also be sent to the Central Licence Approving Authority and to the concerned 
Zonal/ Sub-Zonal Officers of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation.] 
942[FORM 27D 
(See rule 75) 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT 943[***] OF A LICENCE TO 
MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION OF 944[LARGE 
VOLUME PARENTERALS/ SERA AND VACCINE/RECOMBINANT 
DNA (R-DNA) DERIVED DRUGS] EXCLUDING THOSE SPECIFIED 
IN SCHEDULE X 
1. I/We,.......................... of..............................hereby apply for the 945[grant] of 
a licence to manufacture for sale or distribution on the premises situated at 
..........................., the undermentioned 4[Large Volume Parenterals/Sera and 
Vaccine/Recombinant DNA (r -DNA) derived drugs], s pecified in Schedules C 
and C(l) to the Drugs Rules, 1945. 
2. Name(s) of drug(s)....................(each item to be separately specified). 
3. The name(s), qualifications and experience of the competent technical staff 
responsible for the manufacture of the above mentioned drugs. 
(a) Name(s) of staff responsible for testing........................ 
(b) Name(s) of staff responsible for manufacture............................ 
4. The premises and plant are ready for inspection/will be ready for inspection 
on.....................: 
5. A fee or rupees......................................and an inspection fee of 
rupees..................has been credited to the Government under the Head of 
Account................... 
Signature...................... 
Date..................................................................Designation................... 
Notes 1. The application is to be accompanied by a plan of the premises; list of 
equipments and machinery to be employed for manufacture and testing; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
memorandum of association/constitution of the firm; copies of qualification and 
experience of competent technical staff and documents relating to ownership or 
tenancy of the premises. 
Notes 2. A copy of the application together with relevant enclosure shall also be 
sent each to Central Licence Approving Authority and concerned Zonal/Sub -
Zonal Officers of Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation.] 

946[FORM 27DA 
(See rule 75A) 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT 947[***1 OF A LOAN LICENCE TO 
MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION OF LARGE 
VOLUME PARENTERALS/SERA AND VACCINE/ RECOMBINANT 
DNA (R-DNA) DERIVED DRUGS EXCLUDING THOSE SPECIFIED 
UNDER SCHEDULE X 

1. I/We*,........................................of #......... ........................................hereby 
apply for the 948[grant] of a loan licence to manufacture on the premises situated 
at c/o @........................ ............. the under -mentioned drugs being Large 
Volume Parente rals/Sera and Vaccine/ Recombinant DNA (r -DNA) derived 
drugs specified in Schedules C, C(l), excluding those specified in Schedule X to 
the Drugs Rules, 1945. 
2. Name(s) of drugs........................................................... (each item to b e 
separately specified). 
3. The name(s), qualifications and experience of the competent technical staff 
responsible for the manufacture of the above-mentioned drugs. 
(a) Name(s) of competent technical staff responsible for 
testing................................ 
(b) Name(s) of competent technical staff responsible for 
manufacture........................ 
4. I/we enclose: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) A true copy of a letter from letter from me/us to manufacturing concern 
whose manufacturing capacity is intended to be utilized by me/us. 
(b) A true copy of a letter from the manufacturing concern that they agree to 
lend the services of their competent technical staff, equipment and premises for 
the manufacture of each item required by me/us and they will analyse every 
batch of finished product and maintain the registers of raw materials, finished 
products and reports of analysis separately on this behalf. 
(c) Specimens of labels, cartons of the drugs proposed to be manufactured. 
5. A fee of rupees........................ ....................has been credited to Government 
under the head of account..................................] 
Date.................................................. Signature............................. 
Designation......................... 
* Entre here name of the proprietor, partners or Managing Director, as may 
be. 
# Enter here name of the applicant firm and the address of the principal place of 
business. 
@ Enter here the name and address of the manufacturing concern where the 
manufacture will be actually carried out and also the licence number under 
which the latter operates". 
949[FORM 27E 
(See rule 122F) 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT/RENEWAL OF LICENCE TO 
MANUFACTURE BLOOD PRODUCTS FOR SALE OR DISTRIBUTION 

1. I/We,............ of M/s..................hereby apply for the grant of 
licence/renewal of licence number.................... dated........................... to 
manufacture blood products on the premises situated at............... 
2. Name(s) of item(s): 
1. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. 
3. The name(s), qualification and experience of Competent Technical 
Staff as under: 
(a) responsible for manufacturing (b) responsible for testing 
1. 1. 
2. 2. 
4. The premises and plant are ready for inspection/will be ready for inspection 
on..................... 
5. A licence fee of rupees .........................and an inspection fee of rupees 
.............. has been credited to the Government under the Head of Account 
.....................(receipt enclosed). 
Dated....................................................................Signature.................................... 
Name and Designation.................. 
* Delete whichever is not applicable. 
Note 1. The application shall be accompanied by a plant of the premises, list of 
machinery and equipment for manufacture of blood products, memorandum of 
association/constitution of the firm, copies of certificate relating to educational 
qualifications and experience of the competent technical staff and documents 
relating to ownership or tenancy of the said premises. 
Note 2 . A copy of the application together with the relevant enclosures shall 
also be sent to the Central Licence Approving Authority and to the concerned 
Zonal/ Sub-Zonal Officers of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
950[FORM 27F 
(See rule 122F) 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT/RENEWAL* OF LICENCE FOR 
COLLECTION, PROCESSING, TESTING, STORAGE, BANKING AND 
RELEASE OF UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD STEM CELLS 

I/We................................of M/s.............................. hereby apply for the grant of 
licence/renewal* of licence number.................... dated.................... for 
collection, processing, testing, storage, banking and release of umbilical cord 
blood stem cells on the premises situated at............................... 
2. Name(s), qualification and experience of competent Technical Staff are as 
under: 
1. Medical Director 

2. Laboratory In-charge 
3. Technical Supervisor 
4. Cord Blood Bank Technician(s) 
3. The premises and plant are ready for inspection/will be ready for inspection 
on.......................... 
4. A licence fee of rupees.................... and an inspection fee of 
rupees.................... has been credited to the Government under the Hea d of 
Account.................... (receipt enclosed) 
Signature................................... 
Dated..........................................................Name & Designation................ 
"Delete whichever is not applicable. 
Note.—1. The applicat ion shall be accompanied by a plan of the premises, list 
of machinery and equipment for collection, processing, testing, storage, banking 
and release of umbilical cord blood stem cells, memorandum of association/ 
constitution of the Firm, copies of certifi cate relating to educational 
qualification and experience of the competent technical staff and documents 
relating to ownership or tenancy of the premises. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. A copy of the application together with the relevant enclosure shall also be 
sent to the Central L icence Approving Authority and to the Zonal/Sub -Zonal 
Officers concerned of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization.] 
FORM 28 
(See rule 76) 
951[LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR 
DISTRIBUTION OF] DRUGS SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULES C AND C(l) 
952[EXCLUDING THOSE SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE X] 

Number of licence and date of issue.................................. 
1............................................is hereby licensed to manufacture at the premises 
situated at the ................................the following drugs, being drugs specified in 
Schedules C and C(l) 952[excluding those specified in Schedule X] to the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. 
Names of drugs........................................................................... 
2. Names of approved 953[Competent Technical Staff]................................. 
3. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing and storage for 
sale by the licensee of the drugs manufactured under the licence subject to the 
condition application to licence for sale. 
954[4. The licence, unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compli ance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or 
as needed as per risk based approach.] 
5. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other 
conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Date of issue....................................... Signature............................ 
Designation......................... 
955[*Licensing Authority/Central Licence Approving Authority] 
* Delete whichever is not applicable. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence 956[***] shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be 
produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
2. If the licensee wishes to undertake during the currency of the licence the 
manufacture of any drug spe cified in Sch edules C and C(l) 957[excluding those 
specified in Schedule X] not included above, he should apply to the licensing 
authority for the necessary endorsement as provided in rule 75 (3). This licence 
will be deemed to extend to the items so endorsed. 
3. Any change in the 958[Competent Technical Staff] shall be forthwith 
reported to the licensing authority. 
4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution. 
FORM 28A 
(See rule 76A) 
LOAN 959[LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR 
DISTRIBUTION OF] DRUGS SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE C AND C(l) 
960[EXCLUDING THOSE SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE X] 

1. Number of licence and date of issue................................................... 
2................................of...........................is hereby granted a loan licence to 
manufacture on the premises situated at ............... C/o ............................... the 
following drugs being drugs specified in Schedules C and C(l) 961[excluding 
those specified in Schedule X] to the Drugs Rules, 1945. 
Names of drugs ................................................ 
3. Names of approved 962[Competent Technical Staff] ................................. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
963[3A. The licence, unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or 
as needed as per risk based approach.] 
4. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing by the 
licensee and storage for sale by the licensee of the drugs manufactured under 
the licence subject to the conditions applicable to licence for sale. 
5. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other 
conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Date of issue..................................................Signature.......................... 
Designation...................... 
Conditions of Licence 
1. This licence 964[***] shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be 
produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
2. If the licensee wishes to undertake during the currency of the licence to 
manufacture any drug specified in Schedules C and/or C (1) 964[excluding those 
specified in Schedule X] not included above, he should apply to the licensing 
authority for the necessary endorsement as provided in rule 75A. This licence 
will be deemed to extend to the items so endorsed. 
3. Any change in the 962[Competent Technical Staff] shall be forthwith 
reported to the licensing authority. 
4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licen sing authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
965[FORM 28B 
[See rule 76)] 
966[LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION 
OF] DRUGS SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULES C, C(l) AND X 

No. of licence............................................... 
1.............................................is hereby licensed to manufacture at the 
premises situated at...........................the following drugs specified in Schedules 
C, C(l) and X to the Drugs Rules, 1945. 
Name of drugs............................ 
2. Names of approved expert staff. 
3. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing and storage 
for sale by the licensee of the drugs manufactured under the licence subjec t to 
the conditions applicable to licence for sale. 
967[4. The licence, unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or as needed as 
per risk based approach.] 
5. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other 
conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Date...................................................... Signature........................... 
 Designation.......................... 
 968[*Licensing Authority/*Central Licence Approving Authority] 
* Delete whichever is not applicable. 
Conditions of Licence 
1. The licence 969[***] shall be kept at the approved premises and shall be 
produced at the request of the Inspector appointed under the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. If the licensee wishes to undertake during the currency of the licence the 
manufacture of any drug specified in Schedule X not included above, he should 
apply to the licensing authority for the necessary endorsement as provided in 
rule 75(4). This licence will be deemed to be applicable to the items so 
endorsed. 
3. Any change in the expert staff s hall be forthwith reported to the 
licensing authority. 
4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority in writing in the event 
of any change in the constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where 
any change in the constitution of the fi rm takes place, the current licence shall 
be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months from the date on 
which the change takes place unless, in the meantime a fresh licence has been 
taken from the licensing authority in the name of the firm w ith the changed 
constitution. 
5. The licensee shall furnish lo the licensing authority copies of invoices of 
sales made to dealers. 
6. The licensee shall not manufacture drugs specified in Schedule X 
covered by this licence for use as "Physician's Samples".] 
970[FORM 28C 
(See rule 122G) 
LICENCE TO OPERATE A 971[BLOOD CENTRE] FOR COLLECTION, 
STORAGE AND PROCESSING OF WHOLE HUMAN BLOOD 
AND/OR* ITS COMPONENTS FOR SALE OR DISTRIBUTION 

1. Number of Licence.............date of issue...............at the premises situated 
at............ 
2. M/s ................. is hereby licensed to collect, store process and distribute 
whole blood and/or its components. 
3. Name(s) of the item(s) : 
1. 
2. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
4. Name(s) of Competent Technical Staff : 
1. 
2. 
5. The licence authorises licensee to collect, store, distribute, and 
processing of whole blood and/or blood components subject to the conditions 
applicable to this licence. 
6. The licence shall be in force from........... to ............. 
7. The licence shall be subject to the conditions stated below and to such 
other conditions as may be specified from time to time in the Rules made under 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Dated................................................Signature................................................. 
Name and Designation....................... 
*Licensing Authority/ 
*Central Licence Approving Authority 
* Delete, whichever is not applicable. 
Conditions of Licence 
1. The licensee shall neither collect blood from any professional donor or 
paid donor nor shall he prepare blood components from the blood collected 
from such a donor. 
2. The licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be displayed on 
the approved pre mises and the original shall be produced at the request of an 
Inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
3. Any change in the technical staff shall be forthwith reported to the 
licensing authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority. 
4. The licensee shall inform the licensing authority and/or Central Licence 
Approving Authority in writing in the event of any change in tbe constitution of 
the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
the firm tak es place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for 
maximum period of three months from the date on which the change has taken 
place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the licensing 
authority and /or Central Licence Appr oving Authority in the name of the firm 
with the changed constitution.] 
972[FORM 28D 
(See rule 76) 
LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR DISTRIBUTION 
OF 973[LARGE VOLUME PARENTERALS/SERA AND 
VACCINE/RECOMBINANT DNA (R-DNA) DERIVED DRUGS] 
SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE C AND C(l) EXCLUDING THOSE 
SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE X 

Number of licence.........................and Date of issue.............................. 
1....................is hereby licensed to manufacture at the premises situated 
at................ the following 973[Large Volume Parenterals/Sera and 
Vaccine/Recombinant DNA (r -DNA) derived drugs] specified in Schedule C 
and C(l) excluding those specified in Schedule X to the Drugs and Cosmetics 
Rules, 1945. 
2. Name(s) of drug(s) (each item to be separately 
specified).................................. 
3. Name(s) of competent technical staff.................................. 
(a) responsible for manufacturing (b) responsible for testing 
1. 1. 
2. 2. 
4. The licence authorises the sale by way of wholesale dealing and storage 
for sale by the licensee of the drugs manufactured under the licence, subject to 
the conditions applicable to licence for sale. 
974[5. The licence, unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or as needed as 
per risk based approach.] 
6. The licence shall be subject to the conditions stated below and to such 
other conditions as shall be specified in the Rules for the time being in for ce 
under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Signature........................................... 
Designation....................................... 
Licensing Authority/Central Licence Approving Authority 
Date....................... 
Conditions of Licence 
1. The licence 975[***] shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be 
produced at the request of an inspector appointed under the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
2. If the licensee wishes to undertake during the currency of the licence to 
manufacture any drug specified in Schedule C and/or C(l) excluding those 
specified in Schedule X not included above, he should apply to the licensing 
authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority for the necessary 
endorsement as provided in the Rules. This licence shall be deemed to extend to 
the items so endorsed. 
3. Any change in the competent technical staff named in the licence shall 
be forthwith reported to the licensing authority and/or Central Licence 
Approving Authority. 
4. The Licensee shall inform the licensing authority and/or Central Licence 
Approving Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of 
the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of 
the firm takes pl ace, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a 
maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place 
unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been applied for alongwith 
prescribed fee and necessary documents to the li censing authority and/or 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Central Licence Approving Authority in the name of the firm with the changed 
constitution.] 
976[FORM 28DA 
(See rules 76A, 78A, 83AA) 
LOAN LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OR FOR 
DISTRIBUTION OF LARGE VOLUME PARENTERALS/SERA AND 
VACCINE/RECOMBINANT DNA (R-DNA) DERIVED DRUGS 
EXCLUDING THOSE SPECIFIED UNDER SCHEDULE X 

Number of licence................................and date of issue.............................. 
1................................. of............................... is hereby granted a loan licence 
to manufacture on the premises situated at..................... c/o............................ the 
following drugs being Large Volume Parenterals/Scra and 
Vaccine/Recombinant DNA (r -DNA) derived drug s specified in Schedules C, 
C(l), excluding those specified in Schedule X to the Drugs and Cosmetics 
Rules, 1945. 
1. Names of drugs....................................................................... 
2. Name (s) of competent technical staff................................ 
977[3. The licence unless sooner suspended or cancelled shall remain valid 
perpetually. However, the compliance with the conditions of licence and the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three years or 
as needed as per risk based approach.] 
4. The licence authorizes the sale by way of wholesale dealing by the 
licensee and storage for sale by the lic ensee of the drugs manufactured under 
the licence subject to the conditions applicable to licence for sale. 
5. The licence is subject to the conditions stated below and to such other 
conditions as may be specified in the rules for time being in force un der the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Date............................... 
Signature...................................... 
Designation.................................. 
Licensing/ Authority.................. 
Central Licence Approving Authority 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Conditions of licence 
1. This licence 978[***] shall be kept on the approved premises and shall be 
produced at the request of an Inspector appointed under the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
2. Any change in the competent technical staff shall be forthwith reported 
to the Licensing Authority and Central Licence Approving authority. 
3. If the licensee wants, during the currency of the licence, to manufacture 
for sale additional items of drugs not included above, he should apply to the 
Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority for the 
necessary endorsement as provided in the rules. This licence will be deemed to 
extend to the items so endorsed. 
4. The licensee shall inform the Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence 
Approving Authority in writing in the event of any change in the constitution of 
the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the constitution of 
the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed to be valid for a 
maximum period of three months from the date on which the change takes place 
unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the licensing 
Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority in the name of the firm 
with the changed constitution.] 
979[FORM 28E 
(See rule 122G) 
LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE AND STORE BLOOD PRODUCTS 
FOR SALE OR DISTRIBUTION 

1. Number of licence..........................date of issue.....................at the 
premises situated at............. 
2. M/s..............is hereby licensed to manufacture, store, sell or distribute 
the following blood products:— 
3. Name(s) of the item(s): 
1. 
2. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. 
4. 
5. 

4. Name(s) of Competent Technical Staff: 
(a) responsible for manufacturing (b) responsible for testing 
1. 1. 
2. 2. 
3. 3. 
5. The licence authorises the licensee to manufacture, store, sell or 
distribute the blood products, subject to the conditions applicable to this licence. 
6. The licence shall be in force from....................to ................... 
7. The licence shall be subject to the conditions stated below and to such 
other conditions as may be specified from time to time in the Rul es made under 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Signature .................................................... 
Name and Designation.......................... 
Date......................... 
*Licensing Authority/*Central Licence Approving Authority 
Conditions of Licence 
1. The licensee shall not manufacture blood products from the blood drawn 
from any professional donor or paid donor. 
2. This licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be displayed on 
the approved premises and shall be produce d at the request of an Inspector 
appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
3. Any change in the technical staff shall be forthwith reported to the 
licensing authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority. 
4. The licensee shall inform t he licensing authority and/or Central Licence 
Approving Authority in writing any change in the constitution of the firm 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
operating under the licence. In the event of any change in the constitution of the 
firm, the licence shall be deemed to be valid for a p eriod of three months from 
the date on which the change takes place unless, a fresh licence has been taken 
from the licensing authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority in the 
name of the firm with changed constitution.] 
980[FORM 28F 
(See rules 122F to 122-1, 122.K, 122P) 
LICENCE TO COLLECT, PROCESS, TEST, STORE, BANKING AND 
RELEASE OF UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD STEM CELLS 

1. Number of licence............................date of issue...............................at 
the premises situated at...................... 
2. M/s....................is hereby licensed to collect, process, test, store, 
banking and release of umbilical cord blood stem cells. 
3. Name(s) of competent Technical Staff: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
4. The licence authorises licensee to collect, process, test, store, banking 
and release of umbilical cord blood stem cells subject to the conditions 
applicable to this licence. 
5. The licence shall be in force from......................to................................. 
6. The licence shall be subject to the conditions stated below and to such 
other conditions as may be specified from time-to-time in the Rules made tinder 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
Signature............................................ 
Name & Designation....................... 
Licensing Authority......................... 
Central Licence Approving Authority 
Dated.................... 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 

Conditions of Licence 
1. Umbilical cord blood specific for an individual will be collected after 
signing an agreement with the parent(s), whose child's Umbilical cord blood is 
to be collected, and the cord blood bank. 
2. Umbilical cord blood shall be collected from hospitals, nursing homes, 
birthing centers and from any other place where a consenting mothe r delivers, 
under the supervision of the qualified Registered Medical Practitioner 
responsible for the delivery. 
3. The licence and any certificate of renewal in force shall be displayed on 
the approved premises and the original shall be produced at the request of an 
inspector appointed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
4. Any change in the technical staff shall be forthwith reported to the 
Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority. 
5. The licensee shall inform the Licen sing Authority and/or Central 
Licence Approving Authority in writing in the event of any change in the 
constitution of the firm operating under the licence. Where any change in the 
constitution of the firm takes place, the current licence shall be deemed t o be 
valid for maximum period of three months from the date on which the change 
has taken place unless, in the meantime, a fresh licence has been taken from the 
Licensing Authority and/or Central Licence Approving Authority in the name of 
the firm with the changed constitution.] 
FORM 29 
(See rule 89) 
LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE DRUGS FOR PURPOSES OF 
EXAMINATION, TEST OR ANALYSIS 

1...........................|...................... of ......................... is here by licensed to 
manufacture the drugs specified below for purposes of examination, test or 
analysis at....................... 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. This licence is subject to the conditions prescribed in Part VIII of the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. 
3. This licence shall be in force for 981[three years] from the date specified 
below. 
Name of drugs 
Date........................ Licensing Authority........................... 
FORM 30 
(See rule 90) 
APPLICATION FOR LICENCE TO MANUFACTURE DRUGS FOR 
PURPOSES OF EXAMINATION, TEST OR ANALYSIS 

I, .................................., of .................... by occupation ........... ........ hereby 
apply for a licence to manufacture the drugs specified below for purposes of 
examination, test or analysis at ............... and I undertake to compl y with the 
conditions applicable to the licence. 
Names of drugs 
Date................................................Signature................................ 
FORM 31 
982[***] 

FORM 31A 
983[***] 
FORM 32 
984[***] 
FORM 32A 
985[***] 
FORM 33 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
986[***] 
FORM 33A 
987[***] 
FORM 34 
988[***] 

989[FORM 35 
990[See rules 65, 67G, 74, 74A, 74B, 78, 78A, 85H, 
122P, 142, 142B, 150E, 158 and 158A] 
FORM IN WHICH THE INSPECTION BOOK SHALL BE 
MAINTAINED 

(A) The cover of the Inspection Book shall contain the following 
particulars, namely:— 
1. The name and address of the licensee.............................. 
2. Licence number and the date up to which the licence is valid ..................... 
(B) (i) The pages of the Inspection Book shall be serially numbered and duly 
stamped by the li censing authority. The pages, other than the first and the last 
pages, shall have the following particulars:— 
Name and designation of the Inspector who inspects the premises of the 
licensee.......................... 
Date of Inspection.......................... 
Observations of the Inspector.................... 
Signature of the Inspector 
(ii) The first and last pages of the Inspection Book shall be endorsed by the 
licensing authority with the following words, namely:— 
'Inspection Book maintained by M/s....... ..........situated at...............for licence 
number .................in Form................ under Drugs Rules, 1945. 
Seal and Signature of the Licensing Authority 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Notes.—(i) Printed copy of the inspection Book may be obtained by the 
licensee from the licensing authority on payment. 
(ii) The Inspection Book shall be maintained at the premises of the licensee. 
(iii) The observation^ made by the Drugs Inspector shall be in triplicate. The 
original copy shall be retained in the Inspection Book to be m aintained in the 
premises of the licensee. The duplicate copy shall be sent to the licensing 
authority. The triplicate copy shall be taken as record by the Inspector.] 
991[FORM 36 
(See rule 150 B) 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT 992[***] OF APPROVAL FOR CARRYING 
OUT TESTS ON DRUGS/993[***] OR RAW MATERIALS USED IN THE 
MANUFACTURE THEREOF ON BEHALF OF LICENSEES FOR 
MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OF DRUGS/993[***] 994[OR FOR AN 
INDIVIDUAL OR ORGANISATION OR PROCUREMENT AGENCY] 

(1) I/We, ......................................................., of................................ hereby 
apply for the grant 995[***] of approval for carrying out tests of identity, purity, 
quality and strength on the following categories of drugs/ 996[***] or raw 
materials used in the manufacture thereof on behalf of licensees from 
manufacture for sale of drugs/ 993[***]994[or for an individual or organisation or 
procurement agency]. 
(2) *Categories of drugs, 996[***]:— 
(a) Drugs other than those specified in Schedules C and C(l) a nd also 
excluding Homoeopathic Drugs:— 
1. Crude vegetable drugs. 
2. Mechanical contraceptives. 
3. Surgical dressings. 
4. Drugs requiring the use of ultraviolet/Infra Red Spectro -
photometer or Chromatography. 
5. Disinfectants. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6. Other drugs. 

(b) Drugs specified in Schedules C and C(l): 
1. Sera, Vaccines, Antigens, Toxins, Antitoxins, Toxoids, 
Bacteriophages and similar Immunological Products. 
2. Antibiotics. 
3. Vitamins. 
4. Parenteral preparations. 
5. Sterilised surgical ligature/suture. 
6. Drugs requiring the use of animals for their test. 
7. Drugs requiring microbiological tests. 
8. Drugs requiring the use of Ultraviolet/Infra Red Spectro -
photometer or Chromatography. 
9. Homoeopathic drugs. 
(c) Homoeopathic drugs. 
(d) 997[***] 
(3) Names, qualifications and experience of expert staff employed for testing 
and the person-in-charge of testing. 
(4) List of testing equipment provided. 
(5) I/We enclose a plan of the testing premises showing the location and area 
of the different sections thereof. 
(6) An inspection fee of rupees...........................has been credited to 
Government under the head of account........................ 
Dated..........................................................Signature.......................] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
* Delete whichever is not applicable. 

998[FORM 37 
(See rule 150C) 
APPROVAL FOR CARRYING OUT TESTS ON DRUGS/997[***] 
AND RAW MATERIALS USED IN THEIR MANUFACTURE ON 
BEHALF OF LICENSEES FOR MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OF 
DRUGS/997[***] 999[OR FOR AN INDIVIDUAL OR ORGANISATION OR 
PROCUREMENT AGENCY] 

Number of approval and date of issue............................................................. 
(1) Approval is hereby granted to.............................for carrying out tests for 
identity, purity, quality and strength on the following categories of 
drugs/1001[***] and the r aw materials used in the manufacture thereof on the 
premises situated at.............................. 
Categories of drugs/1001[***]. 
(2) Names of approved 1000[Competent Technical Staff] employed for testing 
and person-in-charge of testing. 
1002[(3) The approval, unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall remain 
valid perpetually. How ever, the compliance with the conditions of approval 
 and the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the 
Drugs and 997[***] Rules, 1945 shall be assessed not less than once in three 
years or as needed as per risk based approach.] 
4. The approval is subject to the conditions stated below and such other 
conditions as may be specified in the Rules for the time being in force under the 
Act. 
Date...................................... Signature................................... 
Designation............................... 
Conditions of Approval 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(1) This approval 1003[***] shall be kept in the approved premises and shall 
be produced at the request of the Inspector appointed under the Act. 
(2) If the approved institution wishes to undertake during the currency of 
the approval the te sting of any other category of drugs 1004[***] it should apply 
to the approving authority for necessary endorsement as provided in Rule 150B. 
This approval will be deemed to extend to the items so endorsed. 
(3) Any change in the analytical staff or in the person -in-charge of the 
testing shall be forthwith reported to the approving authority. 
1005[(4) The approved institution shall inform the approving authority in 
writing in the event of any change of the constitution of the institution operating 
under this Form. Where any change in the constitution of the institution takes 
place, the current approval shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of 
three months from the date on which the change t akes place unless in the 
meantime, a fresh approval has been taken from the approving authority in the 
name of the institution with the changed constitution.]] 
FORM 38 1006[***] 

1007[FORM 39 
[See rule 150E(f)] 
REPORT OF TEST OR ANALYSIS BY APPROVED INSTITUTION 

(1) Name of manufacture from whom sample received together with his 
manufacturing licence number under the Act and under the rules made 
thereunder. 
(2) Reference number and date of the le tter from the manufacturer under 
which the sample was forwarded. 
(3) Date of receipt of the sample. 
(4) Name of drug/ 1008[***]/raw material purporting to be contained in the 
sample. 
(5) Details of raw material/final product (in bulk)/final product (in finished 
pack)* as obtained from the manufacturer: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) Original manufacturer's name in the case of raw materials and 
drugs repacked. 
(b) Batch number. 
(c) 1009[Batch size as represented by sample.] 
(d) Date of manufacture, if any. 
(e) Date of expiry, if any. 
(6) Results of test or analysis with protocols of test analysis applied. 
In the opinion of the undersigned, the sample referred to above is of 
standard quality/is not of stan dard quality as defined in the Act and the Rules 
made thereunder for the reasons given below. 
Date..........................................Signature of person-in-charge of testing] 
Note : Final product includes repacked material. 
* Delete whichever is not applicable. 
1010[FORM 39A 
[See sub-rule (f) of rule 150E] 
REPORT OF TEST OR ANALYSIS BY APPROVED INSTITUTION 
FOR AN INDIVIDUAL OR ORGANISATION OR PROCUREMENT 
AGENCY 

(1) Name of individual or organisation or procurement agency from whom 
sample is received............................ 
(2) Serial number and date of sender's memorandum......................... 
(3) Number of samples......................................................................... 
(4) Date of receipt of the sample........... ................................................... 
(5) Name of drug or cosmetics or raw material purporting to be contained 
in the sample............ ........................................ ........ ............ 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(6) Details of raw material or final product in bulk or final product in 
finished pack* as obtained by sender: 
(a) Name and address of the Manufacturer and Licence number 
mentioned on the label............ .................................... ... 
(b) Name of original Manufacturer in the case of raw materials and re -
packed drugs ...... ...................................................................... 
(c) Batch number....................................... ........................ 
(d) Date of manufacture, if any............ .............................................. 
(e) Date of expiry, if any............................ ......................... 
(7) Results of test or analysis with protocols of test or analysis applied. 
In the opinion of th e undersigned, the sample referred to above is *of 
standard quality/is not of standard quality as defined in the Act and the rules 
made thereunder for the reasons given below. 
Date..........................................Signature of Person-in-charge of testing 
Note : Final product includes repacked material. 
* Delete whichever is not applicable.] 
1011[FORM 40 
(See rule 24A) 
APPLICATION FOR ISSUE OF REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE FOR 
IMPORT OF DRUGS INTO INDIA UNDER THE DRUGS AND 
COSMETICS RULES, 1945 
I/We*,.....................................................(name and full address) hereby apply 
for the grant of Registration Certificate to the manufacturer M/s................... 
..............................(full address with te lephone, fax and E -mail address of the 
foreign manufacturer) for his premises, and manufactured drugs meant for 
import into India. 
1. Name of Drugs for registration. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1012[***] 
2. I/We* enclose herewith the information and undertakings specified in 
Schedule D(I) and Schedule D(II) duly signed by the manufacturer for grant of 
Registration Certificate for the premises stated below. 
3. A fee of....................................for registration of premises, the 
particulars of which are given below, of the manufacturer has been credited to 
the Government under the Head of Account "0210 -Medical and Public Health, 
04-Public Health, 104 -Fees and Fines" under the Drugs Rules, 1945—Central 
vide Challan No......................... ....... dated............................ (attached in 
original). 
4. A fee of..............................for registration of the drugs for import as 
specified at Serial No.2 above has been credited to the Government under the 
Head of Account "0210-Medical and Public Health, 04-Public Health, 104-Fees 
and Fines" under the Drugs Rules, 1945 —Central vide Challan No.............., 
dated......................... (attached in original) 
5. Particulars of premises to be registered where manufacture is carried on: 
Address(es).......................................................................... 
Telephone........................................................................... 
Fax.................................................................................... 
E-mail.................................................................................. 
I/we undertake to comply with all the terms and conditions required to obtain 
Registration Certificate and to keep it valid during its validity period. 
Place.................... 
Date........................................ Name................................ 
Signature....................... ....... 
Designation................................ 
Seal/Stamp of manufacturer or his authorised agent in India. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(Note.—In case the applicant is an authorised agent of the manufacturer in 
India, the Power of Attorney is to be enclosed). 
*Delete whichever is not applicable.] 
1013[FORM 41 
(See rule 27A) 
REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE 
 TO BE ISSUED FOR IMPORT OF DRUGS INTO INDIA 
 UNDER THE DRUGS RULES, 1945 

Registration Certificate No............................. Date...................... 
M/s................................................... ........ (Name and full Address of registered 
office) .................................................................................... ........having factory 
premises at........................................(full address) has been registered under rule 
27A as a manufacturer and is hereby issued this Registration Certificate. 
2. Name(s) of drugs which may be imported under this Registration 
Certificate. 
1014[***] 
3. This Registration Certificate shall be in force from. .....................to................. 
unless it is sooner suspended or cancelled under the rules. 
4. This Registration Certificate is issued through the office of the 
manufacturer or his authorised agent in India M/s (name and full 
address)....................................................who will be responsible for the 
business activities of the manufacturer, in India in all respects. 
5. This Registration Certificate is subject to the conditions, stated below 
and to such other conditions as may be specified in the Act and the rules, from 
time to time. 
Place............................................. .. Licensing Authority 
Date......................................... ............. Seal/Stamp 
Conditions of the Registration Certificate 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1. The Registration Certificate shall be displayed at a prominent place by 
the authorised agent. 
2. No drug shall be registered unless it has a free s ale approval in the 
country of origin, and/or in other major countries. 
3. The manufacturer or liis aut horised agent in India shall comply with the 
conditions of the import licence issued under the Drugs Rules, 1945. 
4. The manufacturer or his authorised agent in India shall inform the 
licensing authority forthwith in the event of any administrative acti on taken due 
to adverse reaction, viz. market withdrawal, regulatory restrictions, or 
cancellation of authorisation, and/or not of standard quality report of any drug 
pertaining to this Registration Certificate declared by the Regulatory Authority 
of the c ountry of origin or by any Regulatory Authority of any other country, 
where the drug is marketed/sold or distributed. The despatch and marketing of 
the drug in such cases shall be stopped immediately, and the licensing authority 
shall be informed immediate ly. Further action in respect of such stopped 
marketing of drug shall be followed as per the direction of the licensing 
authority. In such cases, action equivalent to that taken with reference to the 
concerned drug in the country of origin or in the countr y of marketing shall be 
followed in India also, in consultation with the licensing authority. The 
licensing authority may, however, direct any further modification to this course 
of action, including the withdrawal of the drug from Indian market within 48 
hours time period . 
5. The manufacturer or his authorised agent in India shall inform the 
licensing authority within 30 days in writing in the event of any change in 
manufacturing process, or in packaging, or in labelling or in testing, or in 
documentation of any of the drug pertaining to this Registration Certificate. 
In such cases, where there shall be any major change/modification in 
manufacturing, or in processing or in testing, or in documentation as the case 
may be, at the discretion of the licensi ng authority, the manufacturer or his 
authorised agent in India shall obtain necessary approval within 30 days by 
submitting a separate application along with the registration fee, as specified in 
clause (ii) of sub-rule (3) of rule 24A. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6. The manufact urer or his authorised agent in India shall inform the 
licensing authority immediately in writing in the event of any change in the 
constitution of the firm and/or address of the registered office/factory premises 
operating under this Registration Certific ate. Where any such change in the 
constitution of the firm and/or address takes place, the current Registration 
Certificate shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three months 
from the date on which the change has taken place unless, in the me antime, a 
fresh Registration Certificate has been taken from the licensing authority in the 
name of the firm with the changed constitution of the firm and/or changed 
address of the registered office or factory premises.] 
FORM 42 
1015[***] 

FORM 43 
1016[***] 

1017[FORM 44 
(See rules 122A, 122B, 122D and 122DA) 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT OF PERMISSION TO IMPORT OR 
MANUFACTURE A NEW DRUG OR TO UNDERTAKE CLINICAL 
TRIAL 

I/we................................of M/s...................................... (address) hereby apply 
for grant of permission for import of and/or clinical trial or for approval to 
manufacture a new drug or fixed dose combination or subsequent permission 
for already approved new drug. The necessary information/data is given below: 
1. Particulars of new drug: 
(1) Name of the drug: 
(2) dosage form: 
(3) Composition of the formulation: 
(4) Test specification: 
(i) active ingredients: 
(ii) inactive ingredients 
(5) Pharmacological classification of the drug: 
(6) Indication for which proposed to be used: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(7) Manufacture of the raw material (bulk drug substances): 
1018[***] 
2. Data submitted along with the application (as per Schedule Y with indexing 
 and page nos.) 
A. Permission to market a new drug: 
(1) Chemical and Pharmaceutical information 
(2) Animal pharmacology 
(3) Animal Toxicology 
(4) Human/Clinical Pharmacology (Phase 1) 
(5) Exploratory Clinical Trials (Phase II) 
(6) Confirmatory Clinical Trials (Phase III) (including published review 
articles) 
(7) Bio-availability, dissolution and stability study Data 
(8) Regulatory status in other countries 
(9) Marketing information: 
(a) Proposed product monograph 
(b) Drafts of label and cartoons 
(10) Application for test license 
1019[(11) New Chemical Entity and Global Clinical Trial— 
(a) Assessment of risk versus benefit to the patients 
(b) Innovation vis-à-vis existing therapeutic option 
(c) Unmet medical need in the country.] 

B. Subsequent approval/permission for manufacture of already approved new 
drug:— 
(a) Formulation: 

(1) Bio-availability/bio-equivalence protocol 
(2) Name of the investigator/centre 
(3) Source of raw material (bulk drug substances) and stability study 
data. 

(b) Raw material (bulk drug substances) 

(1) Manufacturing method 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(2) Quality control parameters and or analytical specification, stability 
report. 
(3) Animal toxicity data. 

C. Approval/permission for fixed dose combination: 

(1) Therapeutic Justification. (authentic literature in 1020[peer-reviewed 
journals]/text books) 
(2) Data on pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics combination. 
(3) Any other data generated by the application on the safety and 
efficacy of the combination. 

D. Subsequent approval or approval for new indication—new dosage form: 
(1) Number and date of approval/permission already granted. 
(2) Therapeutic Justification for new claim/modified dosage form. 
(3) Data generated on safety or quality parameters. 

A total fee of rupees............. (in words) .............................................. ....... has 
been credited to the government u nder the head of 
account.......................................... . (Photocopy of receipt is enclosed). 
Dated................................................ Signature................................ 
Designation............................. 
Note.—Delete, whichever is not applicable. 

1021[FORM 45 
(See rule 122A, 122D, 122DA) 
PERMISSION TO IMPORT FINISHED FORMULATION OF A NEW 
DRUG 
Number of the permission and date of issue............................................ 
M/s.........................................................of ................................ (address) is 
hereby permitted to import the following new drug formulation under rule 
122A/122D/ 122DA of the Drugs Rules, 1945. 
(1) Name of the New drug: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(2) Dosage from: 
(3) Composition: 
(4) Indication 

ated................................ Signature....................................... 
Name and Designation of 
Licensing Authority................. 
Condition for grant of approval/permission 
(1) The formulation shall confirm to the specification approved by the 
Licensing Authority. 
1022[(2) The proper name of the drug or fixed dose combination drug other 
than fixed dose combinations of vitamin and other fixed dose combi nations 
containing three or more drugs, shall be printed or written in a conspicuous 
manner which shall be at least two font size larger than the brand name or the 
trade name, if any, and in other cases the brand name or the trade name, if any, 
shall be wr itten below or after the proper name on the label of the innermost 
container of the drug or every other covering in which the container is packed.] 
(3) The label of the innermost container of the drug and every other 
covering in which the container is packed shall bear a 1023[caution or warning, as 
applicable, depending on whether the drug is covered under Schedule G or 
Schedule H or Schedule HI or Schedule X, as specified in rule 97, in legible 
black coloured font size in a completely red rectangular box] without disturbing 
the other condition printed on the label to depict it is prescription drug. 
(4) The label on the immediate container of the drug as well as the packing 
in which the container is enclosed should contain the following warning: 
"WARNING: To be sold by the retail on the prescription of 
a......................only." 
1024[(5) As Post Marketing Surveillance, the applicant shall submit Periodic 
Safety Update Reports every six months fo r the first two years. For subsequent 
two years, the Periodic Safety Update Reports shall be submitted annually.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(6) All reported adverse reaction related to the drug shall be intimated to the 
drugs Controller, India and Licensing Authority and regulatory action resulting 
from their review should be complied with. 
(7) No claims except those mentioned above shall be made for the drug 
without the prior approval of the Licensing Authority. 
(8) Specimen of the cartoon, labels, package insert that will be adopted for 
marketing the drug in the country shall be got approved from the Licensing 
Authority before the drug is marketed. 
(9) Each consignment of imported drug shall be accompanied by a 
test/analyse report. 

1025[FORM 45A 
(See rules 122A and 122DA) 
PERMISSION TO IMPORT RAW MATERIAL (NEW BULK DRUG 
SUBSTANCE) 

Number of the permission and date of issue............................ 
M/s...................................................of ..........................................(address) 
hereby permitted to import the following raw material (new bulk drug 
substances) under ride 122A/122DA of the Drugs Rules, 1945, namely:— 
Name of the raw material (new bulk drug substances): 
(1) ................................................... 
(2) ................................................... 
(3) ................................................... 

Dated........................................... Signature............................................... 
Name and Designation of the Licensing Authority...................... 
Conditions for Grant of Approval/Permission 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(1) The raw material (new bulk drug substance) shall conform to the test 
specifications as approved by the Licensing Authority. 
(2) For manufacture of raw materi al (new bulk drug substance) or its 
formulation in the country, separate approval under rule 122B shall be obtained 
from the Licensing Authority. 
(3) The permission to import shall not be used to convey or imply that the 
raw material (new bulk drug) is categorized as "life saving or essential drug".] 

1026[FORM 46 
(See rule 122B, 122D, 122DA) 
PERMISSION/APPROVAL FOR MANUFACTURE OF A NEW DRUG 
FORMULATION 

Number of the permission and date of issue................................. 
M/s............................of ...................................................... .... (address) is 
hereby granted Permission/Approval to manufacture following new drug 
formulation under rule 122B/122D/122DA of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 
1945, namely:— 
(1) Name of the formulation: 
(2) Dosage form: 
(3) Composition: 
(4) Indications: 
Dated……. Signature……….. 
Name and Designation of Licensing Authority. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Conditions for grant of approval/permission 
(1) The formulation shall confirm to the specification approved by the 
Licensing Authority. 
1027[(2) The proper name of the drug or fixed dose combination drug other 
than fixed dose combinations of vitamin and other fixed dose combinations 
containing three or mo re drugs, shall be printed or written in a conspicuous 
manner which shall be at least two font size larger than the brand name or the 
trade name, if any, and in other cases the brand name or the trade name, if any, 
shall be written below or after the prope r name on the label of the innermost 
container of the drug or every other covering in which the container is packed.] 
(3) The label of the innermost container of the drug and every other 
covering in which the container is packed shall bear a 1028[caution or warning, as 
applicable, depending on whether the drug is covered under Schedule G or 
Schedule H or Schedule HI or Schedule X, as specified in rule 97, in legible 
black coloured font size in a completely red rectangular box] w ithout disturbing 
the other condition printed on the label to depict it is prescription drug. 
(4) The label on the immediate container of the drug as well as the packing 
in which the container is enclosed should contain the following warning: 
"WARNING: To be sold by the retail on the prescription of 
a......................only." 
1029[(5) As Post Marketing Surveillance, the applicant shall submit Periodic 
Safety Update Reports every six months for the first two years. For subse quent 
two years, the Periodic Safety Update Reports shall be submitted annually.] 
(6) All reported adverse reaction related to the drug shall be intimated to 
the Drugs Controller, India and Licensing Authority and regulatory action 
resulting from their review should be complied with. 
(7) No claims except those mentioned above shall be made for the drug 
without the prior approval of the Licensing Authority. 
(8) Specimen of the cartoon, labels, package insert that will be adopted for 
marketing the dr ug in the country, shall be get approved from the Licensing 
Authority before the drug is marketed. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1030[FORM 46A 
(See rules 122B and 122DA) 
PERMISSION/APPROVAL FOR MANUFACTURE OF RAW 
MATERIAL (NEW BULK DRUG SUBSTANCE) 

Number o f the permission and date of 
issue...................................................................... 
M/s………………………….of…………………….(address) is hereby 
granted Permission/Approval to manufacture the following raw material (new 
bulk drug substances) under rule 122B/122DA of the Drugs Rules, 1945:— 
Name of the raw material (new bulk drug substance): 
(1) ................................................... 
(2)................................................... 
(3) ................................................... 
Dated.......................................... Signature.................................................. 
Name and Designation of the Licensing Authority............... 
Conditions for Grant of Permission/Approval 
(1) The raw material (new bulk dru g substance) shall confirm to the 
specifications approved by the Licensing Authority. 
(2) The raw material (new bulk drug substance) can be sold to only those 
manufacturers who have permission, in writing, from Licensing Authority, 
either to use the dru g for development purpose/clinical trial/bio -equivalence 
study or to manufacture the formulation. 
(3) For manufacture of the formulation in the country, separate approval 
under rule 122B shall be obtained from the Licensing Authority.] 
1031[FORM 47 
(See rule 160 A) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT OR RENEWAL OF APPROVAL FOR 
CARRYING OUT TESTS ON AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA AND UNANI 
DRUGS OR RAW MATERIALS USED IN THE MANUFACTURE 
THEREOF ON BEHALF OF LICENSEES FOR MANUFACTURE FOR 
SALE OF AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA AND UNANI DRUGS 
1. *I/We................................................ of ............................ ........ hereby 
apply for the grant/renewal of approval for carrying out tests of identity, purity, 
quality and strength on the following catego ries of Ayurvedic, Siddha and 
Unani drugs or raw materials used in the manufacture thereof on behalf of 
licensee for manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs. 
2. *Categories of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs other than those 
specified in the First Schedule to this Act for which testing will be carried out: 

AYURVEDA AND SIDDHA UNANI 
1. Asava and Arista 1.Nabeez, Khal (Sirka) 
2.Arka-Tinir 

2.Majoon and its sub-categories Itrifal, 
Jawarish, Khameera, Laooq, Halwar 

3.Avaleha and Paka-Ilakam 3.Sufoof, Zuroor, Sunoon. 
4. Kavatha Curna-Kutinir Curanam 4.Namak, Khar 
5. Guggulu 
6. Ghrita-Ney 
7. Chuma-Curanam 
8. Taila-Tailam 
9. Dravaka-Tiravakam 
10. Lavana-Uppu 
11. Kshara-Saram 
12. Lepa-Pacai 
13. Vati, Gutika-Kulikai 
14. Vartti 
15. Netrabindu (Aschyotan) 
16. Anjana-Kanmai 
17. Sattva-Sattu 
18. Kupipakva Rasayana -Kuppi Centuram 
19. Parpati 
20. Pishti 
21. Bhasma-Parpam 
22. Mandura-Atai Kutinir 
23. Rasayoga-Centuram 
5. Raughan 
6. Zimad 
7. Habb (Pill) 
8. Shiyaf 
9. Qutoor(drops) 
10. Kohal (Surma), Kajal 
11. Satt, Usara 
12. Kushta 
13. Joshanda (single drugs) 
14. Sharbat Sikanjabeen 
15. Sayyal, Arq (Distillates) 
16. Qurs (Tablet) 
17. Marham, Qairooti 
18. Humool, Furzaja 
19. Bakhoor 
20. Nabati Advia 
21. Maadni Advia 
22. Ajsad Advia 
23. Haiwani Advia 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
24. Lauha 
25. Ghana Sattva 
26. Kvath Pravahi-Kutinir 
27. Panak (Syrup)-Manappaku 
28. Tablet-Mattirai 
29. Capsule 
30. Ointment-Kalimapu 
31. Phalavarti 
32. Dhoomravarti/Doopan 
33. Kshar Sutra/Kshar Varti 
34. Single drugs: 
(a) Plant based 
(b) Mineral based 
(c) Metal based 
(d) Animal based 
(e) Synthetic 
(f) Any other Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani 
formulation. 
35. Pushp (Phool) 
36. Nasya 
37. Swarasa (Fresh juice) 
38. Kama Bindu (Ear drops) 
39. Any other dosage form of Patent and 
Proprietary and Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani Drug. 
24. Jauhar 
25. Natool 
26. Nashooq, Naswar 
27. Shamoom 
28. Saoot (Nasal drops) 
29. Mazoogh 30 Tila 
31. Lashooq 
32. Gulqand 
33. Fateela 
34. Ghaza, Ubtan, Sabhgh 

35. Capsule 
36. Huqna 
37. Naurah 
38. Latookh 
39. Vajoor (Throat pain) 
40. Mazmazah (Mouth washer) 
(3) Names, qualifications and experience of experts employed for testing and 
the person-in-charge of testing. 
(4) List of testing equipment provided. 
(5) *I/We enclose a plan of the testing premises showing the location and area 
of the different sections thereof. 
(6) An inspection fee of rupees ........ .has been credited to Government under 
the head of account……………. 
Dated................................. 
Signature.................................... 
Full address of the Applicant 
* Delete whichever is not applicable 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1032[FORM 48 
(See rule 160B) 
APPROVAL FOR CARRYING OUT TESTS OR ANALYSIS ON 
AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA AND UNANI DRUGS OR RAW MATERIALS 
USED IN THE MANUFACTURE THEREOF ON BEHALF OF 
LICENSEES FOR MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OF AYURVEDIC, 
SIDDHA AND UNANI DRUGS 

Number of approval and date of issue: 
(1) Approval is hereby granted to. ..................................................for carrying 
out tests for identity, purity, quality and strength on the following categories of 
Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs and the raw materials used in the 
manufacture thereof on the premises situat ed at........................................ 
Categories of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs. 
(2) Name of experts employed for testing and the person -in-charge of 
testing................ (experts) and ......................... (person-in-charge) 
(3) The approval shall be in force from...................to........................... 
(4) The approval is subject to the conditions stated below and such other 
conditions as may be specified in the rules for the time being in force under the 
Act. 
Date..................................................................Signature................................ 
Place................................................................Designation............................ 
Seal of State Licensing Authority 
Conditions of Approval 
(1) This approval and any certificate of renewal in Form 42 shall be 
displayed in the approved premises and shall be produced at the request of the 
Inspectors appointed under the Act. 
(2) If the applicant wishes to undertake during the currency of the approval 
the testing of any other category of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs it should 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
apply to the approving authority for necessary endorsement as provided in rule 
160A. This approval will be deemed to extend to the items so endorsed. 
(3) Any change in the experts or in the person-in-charge of the testing shall 
be forthwith reported to the approving authority. 
(4) The applicant shall inform the approving authority in writing in the 
event of any change of the constitution of th e laboratory operating under this 
Form. Where any change in the constitution of the laboratory takes place, the 
current approval shall be deemed to be valid for a maximum period of three 
months from the date on which the change takes place unless in the meantime, a 
fresh approval has been taken from the approving authority in the name of the 
laboratory with the changed constitution.] 

1033[FORM 49 
(See rule 160-1) 
CERTIFICATE OF RENEWAL FOR CARRYING OUT TESTS OR 
ANALYSIS ON AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA OR UNANI DRUGS OR RAW 
MATERIALS USED IN THE MANUFACTURE THEREOF ON BEHALF 
OF LICENSEES FOR MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OF AYURVEDIC, 
SIDDHA OR UNANI DRUGS 
(1) Certified that approval number .............................. granted on the ....... ..... 
day of..................... 2001 for carrying out tests of identity, purity, quality 
and strength on the following categories o f Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani 
drugs and the raw materials used in the manufacture thereof at the 
premises sit uated at...........................has been renewed 
from................to...................... (Date). 
Categories of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs. 
…………………………………… 
………………………………… 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(2) Names of experts and the person-in-charge of testing.................. (experts) 
and ................................(person-in-charge). 
Date............................................. .Signature.................................. 
Place............................................ Designation............................... 
Seal of State Licensing Authority] 
1034 [FORM 50 
[See rule 160 D(f)] 
REPORT OF TEST OR ANALYSIS BY APPROVED LABORATORY 

(1) Name of manufacturer from whom sample received together with his 
manufacturing license number under the Act or the rules made 
thereunder………………….. 
(2) Reference number and date of the letter from the manufacturer under 
which the same was forwarded……………………….. 
(3) Date of receipt of the sample………………………………… 
(4) Name of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug or raw ma terial purporting 
to be contained in the sample…………………………….. 
(5) Details of raw material of final product (in bulk finished pack)* as 
obtained from the manufacturer: 
(a) Original manufacturer's name in the case of raw materials and drugs 
repacked ………………………. 
(b) Batch number............................................................. 
(c) Batch size as represented by sample............................................. 
(d) Date of manufacture, if any......................................................... 
(e) Date of expiry, if any.............................................................. 
(6) Results of test or analysis with protocols of test or analysis applied or 
as per Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Pharmacopoeial standards. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(7) Other specific tests for identity, purity, quality and strength of Patent 
and Proprietary drugs. 
In the opinion of the undersigned, the sample referred to above is of 
standard Equality/is not of standards quality as defined in the Act or the rules 
made thereunder for the reasons given below: 
(Signature of the person-in-charge of testing) 
Date............................................ (F.No................................................) 
Place.............................................. Name and Designation and Seal 
Name and Address of the Laboratory.................................. 
Licence No...................................... 
Note.—Final product includes repacked material. 
"Delete whichever is not applicable.] 
1035[FORM 51 
[See rules 71(9), 71A(5), 71B(v), 76(11) and 76A(v)] 
FORM OF UNDERTAKING TO THE LICENSING AUTHORITY FOR 
MARKETING A DRUG UNDER A BRAND NAME OR TRADE NAME 

(1) I .................................. of................................... intend to market the drug 
specified below under a brand name or trade name —
................................................ 
(i) Name of the drug: 
(ii) Dosage form: 
(iii) Composition: 
(2) I hereby give this undertaking that to the best of my knowledge based 
on s earch in trade marks registry, central data base for brand name or trade 
name of drugs maintained by Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation, 
literature and reference books on details of drug formulations in India, and 
internet, such or similar brand n ame or trade name is not already in existence 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
with respect to any drug in the country and the proposed brand name or trade 
name shall not lead to any confusion or deception in the market. 
Place......................................... ................................................. 
Date................................................................[Signature, Name, Designation 
 Seal/Stamp of manufacturer or on behalf of the manufacturer]] 
1036[SCHEDULE B 
(See rules 7 and 48) 
FEES FOR TEST OR ANALYSIS BY THE CENTRAL DRUGS 
LABORATORIES OR STATE DRUGS LABORATORIES 
1. Fees for test and assay of Drugs requiring use of animals— 
Rupees 
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone assay 1000 
Gonadotrophic hormone for LH activity 1000 
FSH activity 1000 
Posterior pituitary extract or its Synthetic substitute for oxytocin activity 400 
Vasopressor activity 400 
Insulin and insulin in combination for hypogloycaemic activity 2000 
Hyaluronidase 500 
Glucagon 2000 
Heparin for anticoagulant activity 600 
Protamine sulphate 300 
Depressor or Histamine like substance 300 
Pyrogen test 500 
Antigened ty or foreign protein test 300 
Abnormal or undue toxicity or safety test 200 
Determination of Lethal doses, LD10 or LDM| in mice 800 
Skin sensitivity/eye irritation 250 
Implantation test 2000 
2. Microbiological tests and assays— 

Bioassay of Antibiotic 400 
Microbiological assay of vitamins 300 
Phenol coefficient 300 
Preservative-Microbial Challenge test 2000 
Sterility test-Parenteral preparations 100 
Surgical dressings 200 
Syringes and needles 300 
Transfusion and infusion sets or assemblies 400 
Other sterile devices 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 

3. Identification tests— 
(a) Chemical Methods 50 
(b) Microscopical 50 
(c) IR Spectroscopy 150 
(d) UV Spectroscopy 100 
(e) Chromatography 
 (i) Paper 100 
 (ii) Thin layer 150 
 (iii) Column 100 
 (iv) GLC 250 
 (v) HPLC 500 
 (vi) Gel filtration 300 
(f) Electrophoresis 
 (i) Paper and cellulose acetate 200 
 (ii) Polyacrylamide Gel, starch gel, agar gel 300 each 
Physical tests— 
(a) Optical rotation, specific gravity, refractive index, weight, per ml, 
 fluorescence 75 each 
(b) Viscocity 100 
(c) Ph, solubility, loss on drying, net content, ash, sulphated ash etc. 20 each 
(d) Absorbancy, wt/unit area (surgical) foreign matter, extractive 
 value, thread count etc. 30 each 
(e) Uniformity of weight 
 (i) Tablets 15 
 (ii) Capsules 20 
(f) Acid value, iodine value, peroxide value, saponification value, 
 acetyl value. 100 each 
(g) Disintegration tests— 
 (i) Ordinary tablets 20 
 (ii) Capsule 30 
 (iii) Sugar coated tablets 50 
 (iv) Enteric coated tablets 100 
(h) Dissolution test 250 
(i) Uniformity of content 500 
(i) Wt. per unit area (powder), particle size, count, methoxy value 200 each 
(k) Limit test for impurities 100 each 
(1) Related substances (i) TLC method 
 (A) Without reference standards 150 
 (B) With reference standards (ii) Gas Liquid Chromatography 250 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
 (A) Without reference standards 250 
 (B) With reference standards 350 
 (iii) High Pressure Liquid Chromatography 500 
 (A) Without reference standards 500 
 (B) With reference standards 200 

(m) Water (Karl Fisher) 
(5) Assays— 
(a) General chemical method 100 for each ingredient 
(b) Non-aqueous/instrumental 200 for each ingredient 
(c) Chromatography 
(i) TLC 250 
(ii) Column 200 
(iii) GLC 350 
(iv) HPLC 500 
(v) Gel filtration 400 
(d) Nitrogen determination 200 
(e) Medicinal gases 400 
(6) Polymorph test— 300 
(Content of polymorph A in chloramphenicol-palmitate) 
Surgical sutures (Depending on number of tests to be carried 200-500 
Other miscellaneous tests 100-500 

II. Fees for Sera and Vaccine— 
Sterility test 100 
Abnormal toxicity test 400 
Specific toxicity test 800 
Inactivation test (Rabies) 200 
Potency testing of rabies vaccine 2025 
Potency testing of pertussis fraction of DPT vaccine 2025 
Potency testing of tetanus fraction of DPT/DT/TT vaccine 2500 
Potency testing of diphetheria fraction of DPT/DT vaccine 2700 
Testing of antisera for the specific titre 1000 
Potency testing of measles/Mumps/Rubella Vaccine 760 each 
Testing of Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV) 400 
Potency 4550 
Indentity 1000 
Stability 800 
Potency testing of Japanese Encephalitis Vaccine 3900 
Potency testing of Snake Venoms Serum 400 for each venom 
Identity testing for vaccines / sera cell culture (Other than OPV) 400 
Other than cell culture 100 
Estimation of volume/PH/total solids/No. 
of organisms/ Physical checking 50 each 
Estimation of total proteins/aluminium content/ 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
phenol/formaldehyde/thiomersal/moisture 200 each 
Pyrogen testing 500 
Stability test for vaccines other than Oral Polio Vaccine 4550 
IV. Rubber Condoms 1000 
1037[***] 

V. 1038[***] 
Notes.—1. For tests not listed in the Schedule, changes will be determined by 
the Director or the Government Analyst of the Laboratory/institute as the cas e 
may be. 
2. 1039[***]] 

1040[SCHEDULE B(1) 
(See rule 163F) 
FEES FOR THE TEST OR ANALYSIS BY THE PHARMACOPOEIA 
COMMISSION FOR INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY OR 
THE GOVERNMENT ANALYST 
S.No. Type of testing/analysis Cost of testing or 
analysis in Rupees 
 (1) (2) 
1. Test for sterility 500.00 
2. Abnormal toxicity or undue toxicity or safety test 750.00 
3. Determination of lethal does LD50 to 10 on mice 2500.00 
4. Chemical test for each ingredient 500.00 
5. Disinfectants 1000.00 
6. Any other test requiring animal experimentation 500.00 
7. Microbiological assay 1000.00 
8. Microscopic examination of single drugs 500.00 
9. Microscopic examination of raw material of compound drug 100.00 
10. Chemical identification as per Pharmacopoeia 250.00 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
11. Disintegration of tablets and capsules 
 (a) ordinary 200.00 
 (b) sugarcoated 200.00 
 (c) enteric coated 400.00 
12. Physiochemical Assays 300.00 
13. Test other than assay (limit tests for impurities ,ash Content, total solids, 
acid value, saponification value, loss ondrying etc.) for each test. 250.00 
14. Optical rotation 300.00 
15. Refractive index 250.00 
16. Arsenic testing 250.00 
17. Paper chromatography 250.00 
18. Thin layer chromatography 800.00 
19. Column chromatography 2500.00 
20. Gas liquid chromatography 2000.00 
(1) (2) (3) 
21. HPTLC restricted to single drugs qualitative 2000.00 
22. Atomic absorption spectrophotometry for Hg, Pb, As, Cd and 
Biochemic drug 1000.00 
23. Cosmetics/tails/creams 500.00 
24. Identification test for raw material of plant origin(other than assay of 
constituents) 250.00 
25. Identification test for raw material of chemical origin (other than assay) 250.00 
26. Limit test for drug of chemical origin 200.00 
27. Assay of total alkaloids or of drugs of chemical origin 250.00 
28. Identification test for drugs of animal origins or Microbiological testing. 250.00 
29. 
Fees for testing of Mother tincture, lower potencies upto 3X or 
Equivalent, ointment, oils, Bioche mic/ triturations/ homoeopathic 
formulations 
500.00 for each test 
30. Other miscellaneous tests 1000.00 
Note:—Sample testing charges shall be determined or revised by the 
Director, Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy 
or Governmen t Analyst of its Central Laboratory, as the case may be, in 
consultation with the Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, 
Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH).] 
1041[SCHEDULE C 
(See rules 23, 61 and 76 and Part X) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
BIOLOGICAL AND SPECIAL PRODUCTS 
1. Sera. 
2. Solution of serum proteins intended for injection. 
1042[3. Vaccines for parenteral injections.] 
4. Toxins. 
5. Antigen. 
6. Antitoxins. 
7. Neo-arsphenamine and analogous substan ces used for the specific 
treatment of infective diseases. 
8. Insulin. 
9. Pituitary (Posterior Lobe) Extract. 
10. Adrenalin and Solutions of Salts of Adrenaline. 
1043[11. Antibiotics and preparations thereof in a form to be administered 
parenterally.] 
1044[12. Any other preparation which is meant for parenteral administration 
as such or after being made up with a solvent or medium or any other sterile 
product and which— 
(a) requires to be stored in a refrigerator; or 
(b) does not require to be stored in a refrigerator.] 
13. Sterilized surgical ligature and sterilized surgical suture. 
1045[14. Bacteriophages.] 
1046[15. Ophthalmic preparations.] 
1047[16. Sterile Disposable Devices for single use only.]] 

1048[SCHEDULE C(I) 
(See rules 23, 61 and 76) 
OTHER SPECIAL PRODUCTS 

1. Drugs belonging to the Digitalis group and preparations containing 
drugs belonging to the Digitalis group not in a form to be administered 
parenterally. 
2. Ergot and preparations containing Ergot not in a form to be administered 
parenterally. 
3. Adrenaline and preparations containing Adrenaline not in a form to be 
administered parenterally. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
4. Fish Liver Oil and preparations containing Fish Liver Oil. 
5. Vitamins and preparations containing any vitamins not in a form to be 
administered parenterally. 
6. Liver extract and preparations containing li ver extract not in a form to 
be administered parenterally. 
7. Hormones and preparations containing hormones not in a form to be 
administered parenterally. 
8. Vaccine not in a form to be administered parenterally. 
1049[9. A ntibiotics and preparations thereof not in a form to be administered 
parenterally.]] 
1050[10. In-vitro Blood Grouping Sera. 
11. In-vitro Diagnostic Devices for HIV, HbsAg and HCV.] 
SCHEDULE D 
(See rule 43) 

Class of drugs Extent and conditions of exemption 
1. 1051[Substances not intended for medicinal use 
excluding those intended to be used as drugs after 
further purification or rendering them sterile.] 

All provisions of Chapter III of the Act and 
Rules thereunder subject to the condition 
that if the substance is imported in bulk, the 
importer shall certify that the substance is 
imported for non -medical uses, and if 
imported otherwise than in bulk, each 
container shall bear a lab el indicating that 
the substance is not intended for medicinal 
use or is intended for some purposes other 
than medicinal us e or is of commercial 
quality. 1052[Further, permission from 
licensing authority as defined in clause (b) 
of rule 21 has to be obtained for import of 
the substance for non -medicinal use without 
registration and import licence.] 
1053[***] 
1054[***] 

1055[5. The following subs tances, which are 
used both as articles of food as well as 
All the provisions of Chapter III of the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Class of drugs Extent and conditions of exemption 
drugs:— 
(i) all condensed or powdered milk 
whether pure, skimmed or malted, fortified 
with vitamins and minerals. 
(ii) Farex, Oats, Lactose and all other 
similar cereal preparations whether fortified 
with vitamins or otherwise excepting those 
for parenteral use. 
(iii) Virol, Bovril, Chicken essence and 
all other similar predigested food. 
(iv) Ginger, Pepper, Cumin, Cinnamon 
and all other similar spices and condiments 
unless they are spec ifically labelled as 
conforming to the standards in the 
1056[Indian Pharmacopoeia or the official 
pharmacopoeias and the official compendia 
of drug standards prescribed under the Act 
and Rules made thereunder.]] 
1057[6. Drugs and cosmetics imported for 
manufacture and export by units situated in 
"Special Economic Zones" as notified by 
the Government of India from time to time. 
Act and Rules thereunder. 

The provisions of Chapter III of the Act 
and rules thereunder which require them 
to be covered by an import licence, 
import registration ana import through 
notified port of entry, subject to tne 
conditions that these drugs and 1058[***] 
shall not be diverted for sale in the 
country: Provided that such imported 
drugs and cosmetics may be permitted to 
the domestic area if they meet the 
requirements of standard procedure for 
import and registration as required under 
Chapter III of the Act and rules 
thereunder.] 
The provisions of Chapter III of the Act 
and rules thereunder which required them 
to be covered by an import licence, 
import registration and import through 
notified port of entry, subject to the 
conditions that these drugs a nd cosmetics 
shall not be diverted for sale in the 
country: 
 Provided that such imported drugs 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Class of drugs Extent and conditions of exemption 
and cosmetics may be permitted to the 
domestic area if they meet the 
requirements of standard procedure for 
import and registration as required under 
Chapter III of the Act and rules 
thereunder. 
1059[7. Custom Made Devices 

All provisions of Chapter III of the Act and 
the rules made thereunder, subject to the 
condition that the device is specifically 
made in accordance with a dul y qualified 
medical practitioner's written prescription 
under his responsibility, in accordance with 
specific design characteristics and is 
intended for the sole use of a particular 
patient and the label should bear the word 
"custom made device." 
Explanation.—Mass produced devices 
which only need adoption to meet the 
specific requirements of the medical 
practitioner or any other professional user 
shall not be considered to be custom made 
devices.] 

1060[SCHEDULE D(I) 
(See rule 21(d) and rule 24A) 
INFORMATION AND UNDERTAKING REQUIRED TO BE 
SUBMITTED BY THE MANUFACTURER OR HIS AUTHORISED 
AGENT WITH THE APPLICATION FORM FOR A REGISTRATION 
CERTIFICATE 
(The format shall be properly Filled in for each application in Form 40. The 
detailed information, secret in nature, may be furnished on a Computer Floppy) 
1. Particulars of the manufacturer and manufacturing premises :— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1.1 Name and address of the manufacturing premises (Telephone No., 
Fax No., E-mail address) to be registered. 
1.2 Name(s) and address(es) of the Proprietor/Partners/Directors. 
1.3 Name and address of the authorised Agent in India, responsible for 
the business of the manufacturer. 
1.4 A brief profile of the manufacturer's business activity, in domestic 
as well as global market. 
1.5 A copy of Plant Master File (duly notarised). 
1.6 A copy Plant registration/approval Certificate issued by the 
Ministry of Health/National Regulatory Authority of the foreign country 
concerned (duly notarised). 
1.7 A brief profile of the manufacturer's research activity. 
2. Particulars of the manufactured drugs to be registered under 
Registration Certificate: 
2.1 Names of drugs (Bulk/Formulation/special product) to be registered 
meant for import into and use in India: 
2.2 A copy of the approved list showing the bulk 
drugs/formulations/special products mentioned in 2.1 above are permitted 
for manufacturing/marketing m the country of origin, (duly notarised). 
1061[2.3 A copy of Good Manu facturing Practice (GMP) certificate as per 
WHO -GMP guidelines or Certificate of Pharmaceutical Products (CPP) 
or written confirmation for active substances exported to European Union 
which is equivalent to GMP certificate issued as per WHO - GMP 
guidelines, by the National Regulatory Authority of the country of origin 
or a copy of the certificate equivalent to GMP certificate as per WHO 
GMP guidelines issued by National Regulator of United States of 
America or Japan or Australia or Canada or the European Union for the 
purpose of marketing of the drugs in their country, in relation to bulk 
drugs or formulations or special product meant for import into India.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2.4 The domestic prices of the drugs to be registered in India, in the 
currency of the country of origin; 
2.5 The name(s) of the drug(s) which are original research products of 
the manufacturer. 
3. Undertaking to declare that: 
3.1 We shall comply with all the conditions imposed on the 
Registration Certificate read with rules 74 and 78 of the Dr ugs and 
Cosmetics Rules, 1945. 
3.2 We declare that we are carrying on the manufacture of the drugs 
mentioned in this Schedule, at the premises specified above, and we shall 
from time to time report any change of premises on which manufacture 
will be car ried on and in cases where manufacture is carried on in more 
than one factory any change the distribution of functions between the 
factories. 
3.3 We shall comply with the provisions of Part IX of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Rules, 1945; 
3.4 Every drug ma nufactured by us for import under the Registration 
Certificate into India shall be as regard strength, quality and purity 
conforms with the provisions of Chapter III of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1940 and Part IV of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, and t heir 
amendments from time to time: 
3.5 We shall from time to time import for any change or manufacturing 
process, or in packaging, or in labeling, or in testing, or in documentation 
of aiw of the drugs, pertaining to the Registration Certificate, to be 
granted to us. Where any change in respect of any of the drugs under the 
Registration Certificate has taken place, in respect of any of the above 
matters, we shall inform the same to the licensing authority, in writing 
within 30 days from the date of such changes. In such cases, where there 
will be any major change/modification in manufacturing or in processing 
or in testing, or in documentation, as the case may be, at the discretion of 
the licensing authority, we shall obtain necessary approval within 30 days 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
by submitting a separate application, alongwith the registration fee as 
specified in clause (ii) of sub rule (3) of rule 24A. 
3.6 We shall from time to time report for any administrative action 
taken due adverse reaction, viz., market withdrawal regulatory restriction, 
or cancellation of authorisation and/or "not of standard quality import" of 
any drug pertaining the Registration Certificate declared by any 
Regulatory Authority of any country where the drug is marketed/sold or 
distributed. The despat ch and marketing of the drug in such cases, shall 
be stopped immediately and the licensing authority shall be informed 
immediately. Further action in respect of stop marketing of drug shall be 
taken as per the directions of the licensing authority. In such cases, action 
equivalent to that taken with reference to the concerned drug(s) in the 
country of origin or to the country of marketing will be followed in India 
also, in consultation with the licensing authority. The licensing authority 
may direct any further modification to this course of action, including the 
withdrawal of the drug from Indian market 48 hours time period. 
3.7 We shall comply with such further requirements, if any, as may be 
specified, by the Government of India, under the Act and the rules, made 
thereunder. 
3.8 We shall allow the licensing authority and/or any person authorised 
by him in that behalf to enter and inspect the manufacturing premises and 
to examine the process/procedure and documents in respect of any drug 
manufactured by us for which the application for Registration Certificate 
has been made. 
3.9 We shall allow the licensing authority or any person authorised by 
him in that behalf to take samples of the drugs concerned for test, analysis 
or examination, if considered necessary by the licensing authority. 
Place....................... 
Date........................ .................................................. 
Signature of the manufacturer 1062[or his authorised agent] Seal/Stamp 
SCHEDULE D(II) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(See rule 21(d) and rule 24A) 
INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE SUBMITTED BY THE 
MANUFACTURER OR HIS AUTHORISED AGENT WITH THE 
APPLICATION FORM FOR THE REGISTRATION OF A BULK 
DRUG/FORMULATION/SPECIAL PRODUCT FOR ITS IMPORT INTO 
 INDIA 
 (The format shall be properly filled in and the detailed information, secret in 
nature, may be furnished on a Computer Floppy) 
1. General 
1.1 Name of the drug/formulation/special product, a brief description and 
the therapeutic class to which it belongs. 
1.2 Regulatory status of the drug. Free Sale Certificate and/or 
Certificate of Pharmaceutical Products (CPP) issued by the Regulatory 
Authority of the country of origin. Free sale approval issued by the 
Regulatory Authorities of other major countries. 
1.3 Drugs Master File (DMF) for the drug to be registered (duly 
notarised). 
1063[1.4 GMP certificate as per WHO - GMP format, or Certificate of 
Pharmaceutical Products (CPP), or written confirmation for active 
substances exported to the European Union which is equivalent to GMP 
certificate issued as per WHO - GMP guidelines, by the National 
Regulatory Authority of the country of origin or a duly notarised copy of 
the certificate equivalent to GMP certificate as per WHO - GMP 
guidelines issued by United States of America or Japan or Australia or 
Canada or the European Union for the purpose of marketing of the drug 
in their country.] 
1.5 List of countries where marketing authorisation or import permission 
for the said drug is granted with date (respective authorisation shall be 
enclosed). 
1.6 List of countries where marketing authorisation or import permission 
for the said drug is cancelled /withdrawn with date. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1.7 List of countries where marketing authorisation or import permission 
for the said drug is pending since (date). 
1.8 Domestic price of the drug in the currency followed in the country of 
origin. 
1.9 List of countries where the said drug is patented. 
2. Chemical and Pharmaceutical information of Drugs 
2.1 Chemical n ame Code name or number, if any Non -proprietary or 
generic name, if any Structure Physico-chemical properties. 
2.2 Dosage form and its composition, Qualitative and Quant itative 
composition in terms of the active substance(s) and excipient(s). List of 
active substance(s) separately from the constituent(s) of excipient(s). 
2.3 Specification of active and inactive ingredient(s) including 
pharmacopoeil references. 
2.4 Sources of active ingredient(s), name and address. 
2.5 Test for identification of active in gredient(s), Method of its assays 
and tests for impurity profile with reference standards for the impurities 
(Protocol to be submitted alongwith reference standards for the 
impurities) relative substances. 
2.6 Outline method and flow chart of manufactur e of the bulk drug or 
finished formulation or special product. 
2.7 Detailed test protocol for the drug with pharmacopoeil reference or 
in-house specification as approved by the registration authority, in the 
country of origin. 
2.8 Stability date incl uding accelerated stability and real time stability 
analysis. 
2.9 Documentation on pack size 
2.10 Numerical expression or EAN bar code on the labels and cartons. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2.11 Safety documents on containers and closer. 
2.12 Documentation on storage conditions. 
2.13 Three samples of medical products/drug and outer packaging are 
to be submitted with batch certificates. Additional samples as well as 
reference substances with batch certificates including date of 
manufacture, shelf-life storage conditions of reference substance may be 
required both during registration procedure and during validity of 
registration decision. 
2.14 Batch test reports/certificate of five consecutive production 
batches in details of the medicinal product are to be submitted fo r every 
site of manufacturing premises. 
2.15 Manner of labelling as per rule 96 of the Drugs Rules, 1945. 
2.16 Package insert. 
2.17 Details of safety handling procedure of the drug 
2.18 Detaild of PMS study report for marketing period not excee ding 
five years. 

3. Biological and Biopharmaceutical Information of Drugs 
3.1 Biological control tests applied on the starting material, if 
applicable. 
3.2 Biological control tests applied on the intermediate products, if 
applicable. 
3.3 Biological control tests applied on the finished medical products, if 
applicable. 
3.4 Stability of the finished products in terms of biological potency of 
the drug, if applicable. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3.5 Sterility tests, if applicable, specification and protocol therein. 
3.6 Pyrogen tests, if applicable specification and protocol therein. 
3.7 Acute and sub -acute toxicity tests, if applicable specification and 
protocol therein. 
3.8 Bio-availability studies and bio-equivalence data, if applicable. 
3.9 Data relati ng to the environmental risk assessment for r -DNA 
products. 
3.10 Other information relevant under the section. 
4. Pharmacological and Toxicological Information of Drugs 
Executive summary of the product is to be submitted mentioning the 
specific and gene ral pharmacological actions of the drug and 
pharmacokinetic studies on absorption, metabolism, distribution and 
excretion. A separate note is to be given on acute and sub -acute toxicity 
studies and long term toxicity studies. Specific studies on reproductive 
toxicity, local toxicity and carcinogenic activity of the drug is to be 
elaborated, as far as possible. 

5. Clinical Documentation 

A new drug as defined under rule 122E of the Drugs and Cosmetics 
Rules, 1945 is required to be permitted separately by the licensing authority 
under rule 122A of the said rules prior to its registration. Such a new drug 
requires a brief summary on clinical documentation, along with permission 
under 122A of the said rules for its Registration Certificate. 
6. Labelling and Packaging Information of Drugs 
6.1 Lables should conform as per the specifications under the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6.2 Package insert should be in English and shall indicate the following 
therapeutic indications:— 
Posology and method of administration. 
Contra-indications. 
Special warnings and special precautions for use, if any. 
Interaction with other medicaments and oilier forms of intention. 
Pregnancy and lactation, if contra-indicated. 
Effects of ability to driv e and use machines, if contra -indicated. 
Undesirable effects/side effects. 
Antidote for overdosing. 

6.3 Package insert should indicate the following pharmaceutical 
information:— 
List of excipients. 
Incompatibilities. 
Shelf life in the medical product as packaged for sale. 
Shelf life after dilution or reconstitution according to direction. 
Shelf life after first opening the container. 
Special precautions for storage. 
Nature and specification of the container. 
Instructions for use/handling. 

7. Specific I nformation Required for the Special Products (to be 
supplied, separately in annexure, as 'A', ' B' and 'C') 
The information submitted above is true to the best of my knowledge and 
belief. Place................... 
Date........................................ Signature of the manufacturer 
1064[or his authorised agent] Seal/Stamp 
NB.—1. Any change in the process of manufacture, method of testing, 
labelling, packaging, designing of the sale pack, medical literature and 
documentation is to be intimated to the licensing authority forthwith and 
permission to be obtained from him within 30 days time period. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. Information relating to Serial No. 4 and Serial No. 5 are not applicable for 
drugs figuring in Indian Pharmacopoeia and also fo r the drugs figuring in 
United States of Pharmacopoeia, European Pharmacopoeia, and British 
Pharmacopoeia. Provided such drugs have already been approved for marketing 
in India for the applicant under rules 122A, 122B, 122C or 122D of the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. 
ANNEXURE A 
 [See Schedule D (II), item No. 7] 
INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED IN SCHEDULE D (II) 
Specific information required for the blood products 
A product dossier showing the— 
1. Details of source Plasma, its viral screening, storage an d transport from 
Collection Centres to Fractionation Centre. Regulatory status of Collection 
Centres. 
2. Details of Fractionation Centre, Regulatory Status, Method of Fractionation 
and Control Processes. 
3. Details of viral inactivation process for e nveloped and non -enveloped 
virus(es) and viral validation studies to assess the viral load of the product. 
Testing of viral screening at any stage is to be highlighted with the details of the 
Kits used with their respective sensitivity and specificity. 
4. Bulk filtration prior to pharmaceutical packing giving the full details of 
Microfiltration or nano-filtration followed. 
5. Complete details of pharmaceutical processing and unitization. 
6. Test protocol of the product showing the specifications and Pharmacopoeial 
method followed for various testing parameters. 
Specific batch test report for at least 3 batches showing the specifications of 
each testing parameter. 
7. Pack size and labelling 
8. Product Insert. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
9. Specimen Batch Release Certif icate issued by the National Regulatory 
Authority of the country of origin. 
Specific processings like safe handling, material control, area control, 
pasteurization, stability studies, storage at quarantine stage and finished stage 
and packaging should be highlighted in the product dossier. 
The information submitted above is true to the best of my knowledge and 
belief. 
Place.......................... 
Date............................. ……………… 
Signature of the manufacturer Seal /Stamp 
NB.—1. Any change in the process of manufacturer, method of testing, 
labelling, packaging, designing of the sale pack, medical literature and 
documentation is to be intimated to the licensing authority forthwith and 
permission to be obtained from him within 30 days time period. 
ANNEXURE B 
[See Schedule D(II), item No. 7] 

INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED IN SCHEDULE D(II) 
Specific information required for the diagnostic kits 

A product dossier showing the— 
1. The details of source antigen or antibody as the case may be and 
characterisation of the same. Process control of coating of antigen or antibody 
on the base material like Nitrocellulose paper, strips or cards or ELISA wells 
etc. 
Details composition of the kit and manufacturing flow chart process of the kit 
showing the specif ic flow diagram of individual components or source of the 
individual components. 
2. Test protocol of the kit showing the specifications and method of testing. In 
house evaluation report of sensitivity, specificity and stability studies carried 
out by the manufacturer. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. The report of evaluation in details conducted by the National Control 
Authority of country of origin. 
Specimen batch test report for at least consecutive 3 batches showing 
specification of each testing parameter. 
4. The detailed te st report of all the components used/packed in the finished 
kit. 
5. Pack size and labelling. 
6. Product insert. 
Specific evaluation report, if done by any laboratory in India showing the 
sensitivity and specificity of the kit. 
Specific processing lik e safe handling, material control, area control, 
process control, stability studies, storage at quarantine stage and finished 
stage, packaging should be highlighted in the product dossier. 
The information submitted above is true to the best of my knowledge and belief. 
Place:............................... 
Date:................................ 
Signature of the manufacturer Seal/Stamp 
NB.—1. Any change in the process of manufacture, method of testing, 
labelling, packaging, designing of the sale pack, medical literature and 
documentation is to be intimated to the licensing authority forthwith and 
permission to be obtained from him within 30 days time period. 
ANNEXURE C 
[See Schedule D(II), item No. 7] 

INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED IN SCHEDULE D(II) 
Specific information required for vaccines 
A product dossier showing the— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1. History, source, date of receipt, storage, identity and characterisation of 
seed strain. 
2. Detailed flow chart of manufacturing process showing all the details of in -
process control on toxicity, potency study and stability data of the final bulk and 
the final finished product including the storage temperature. 
3. Complete details of chemical and pharmaceutical data for the product. 
Composition and dosage form —method of manufacture w ith detailed flow 
chart—control of starting material —control tests on intermediate and finished 
products certificate of analysis of finished products validation of critical 
manufacturing steps. 
4. Test protocol of the vaccines showing the specification and method of 
testing including Pharmacopoeial specification. 
5. Specimen batch test report for at least consecutive three batches showing 
the specification of each testing parameter. 
6. The detailed lest reports of all the components used/packed in the finished 
vaccine. 
7. Pack-size and labelling. 
8. Product insert. 
9. Specimen batch release certificates issued by the National Regulatory 
Authority of the country of origin 
10. Summary of pre-clinical and clinical data including: 
(a) Prescribing information. 
(b) Pharmacological and toxicological data pertaining to tests on animals 
characterisation of immune response and safety study in human use, in 
specific conditions. 
Specific information on source of seed strain, its characterisation, 
inactivation etc. and processings like safe handling, material control, area 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
control, process control, stability studies, storage at quarantine stage and 
finished stage, packaging should be highlighted in the product dossier. 
Specimen production and qualit y control protocols for at least three 
consecutive lots showing the specifications for each quality control parameter 
including Pharmacopoeial requirement shall be submitted for study. 
The information submitted above is true to the best of my knowledge and belief. 
Place.................................. 
Date................................... ……………… 
Signature of the manufacturer Seal/Stamp 
NB.—1. Any change in the process of manufacture, method of testing, 
labelling, packaging, designing of the sale pack , medical literature and 
documentation is to be intimated to the licensing authority forthwith and 
permission to be obtained from him within 30 days time period. 
2. All vaccines shall be new drugs unless certified otherwise by the licensing 
authority appro ved under rule 21 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rule, 1945. A 
copy of approval of t he vaccine issued by the said licensing authority is to be 
enclosed, prior to issue of Registration Certificate of the said vaccines.] 
SCHEDULE D(III) 
1065[***] 
1066[***] 

1067[SCHEDULE E(1) 
[See rule 161(2)] 
LIST OF POISONOUS SUBSTANCES UNDER THE AYURVEDIC 
(INCLUDING SIDDHA) AND UNANI SYSTEMS OF MEDICINE 

A. AYURVEDIC SYSTEM 
I. DRUGS OF VEGETABLE 
1. Ahipena (Except seeds) 
2. Arka 
ORIGIN 

Papaver somniferum Linn. Except 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. Bhallataka 
4. Bhanga (Except seeds) 
5. Danti 
6. Dhattura 
7. Gunja (Seed) 
8. Jaipala (Seed) 
9. Karaveera 
10. Langali 
11. Parasika Yavani 
12. Vatsanabha/ 
 Shringivisha 
 Holmes 
13.Vishamushti 

II. DRUGS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN 
14. Sarpa Visha 

III. DRUGS OF MINERAL ORIGIN 
15. Gauripashna 
16. Hartala 
17. Manahashila 
18. Parada 
19. Rasa karpura 
20. Tuttha 
21. Hingula 
seeds) Calotropis procera (Ait.) R. Br. 
Semecarpus anacardium Linn. f. 
Cannabis sativa Linn. (Except seeds) 
Baliospermum montanum Mull. Arg. 
Datura metel Linn. 
Abrus precatorius Linn. (Seed) 
Croton tiglium Linn. 
Nerium indicum Mill 
Gloriosa superba Linn. 
Hyoscyamus niger Linn. 
Aconitum ferox, Wall, ex Ser. 
Aconitum Chasmanthum Stapf. Ex 
Stychnos nux vomica Linn. 

Snake poison 

Arsenic 
Arsenic trisulphide 
Arsenic disulphide 
Mercury 
Hydrargyri subchloridum 
Copper sulphate 
Cinnabar 

B. SIDDHA SYSTEM 
1. Abini (except seed) Papaver somniferum Linn 
2. Alari Nerium indicum Mill 
3. Attru thummatti Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schrad 
4. Umathai Datura stramonium Linn. 
5. Etti Stychnos nux vomica Linn 
6. Ganja (except seed) Cannabis sativa Linn. 
7. Kalappaki Kizahangu Gloriosa superba Linn. 
8. Kodikkalli (exempted for external use) Euphorbia tirucalli Linn. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
10. Kattu Thumatti Cucumis trigonus Roxb. 
11. Kunri (except root) Arbus precatorius Linn. 
12. Cheramkottai Semecarpus anacardium Linn.f. 
13. Thillai Exoecoria agallocha Linn. 
14. Nabi Aconitum ferox Wall. 
15. Nervalam Croton tiglium Linn. 
16. Pugaielai Nicotiana tabacum Linn. 
17. Mancevikkalli 
(exempted for external use) 
Euphorbia species 

C. UNANI MEDICINE 
I. DRUGS OF VEGETABLE 
1. Afiyun (except seed) 
2. Bazur-ul-banj 
3. Bish 

4. Bhang (except seed) 
5. Charas (resin) (Except seed) 
6. Dhatura seeds 
7. Kuchla 
8. Shokran 

II. DRUGS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN 
9. Sanp (head) 
10. Telni Makkhi 
ORIGIN 
Papaver somniferum Linn. 
Hyoscyamus niger Linn. 
Aconitum chasmanthum Stapfex 
Holmes 
Cannabis sativa Linn. 
Datura metel Linn, (seeds) 
Stychnos nux vomica Linn. 
Conium maculatum Linn. 

Snake (head) 
Mylabaris cichorii Linn. 
Mylabaris pustulata Thumb 
Mylabaris macilenta 

III. DRUGS OF MINERAL ORIGIN 
11. Darachikna Hydrargyri perchloridum 
12. Hira Diamond 
13. Ras Kappor Hydrargyri Subchloridum (calomel) 
14. Shingruf Hydrargyri bisulphuratum 
15. Zangar Cupri subacetas 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
16. Sammul-Far (Abyaz, Asfar, Aswad and Ahmar (white, yellow, 
black and red, arsenic) 
17. Tootiya Copper Sulphate 
18. Para Hydrargyrum 
19. Hartal Arsenic trisulphite (yellow) 

*Arka used for Bhawna before making Bhasma is exempted.] 

SCHEDULE F 
(See rule 78 and Part X) 
1068[***] 

1069[PART XII B 
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE FUNCTIONING AND OPERATION OF A 
BLOOD BANK AND/OR FOR PREPARATION OF BLOOD 
COMPONENTS 

I. BLOOD BANKS/BLOOD COMPONENTS 
A. General 
1. Location and Surroundings—The blood bank shall be located at a place 
which shall be away from open sewage, drain, public lavatory or similar 
unhygienic surroundings. 
2. Building—The building(s) used for operation of a blood bank and/or 
preparation of blood components shall be constructed in such a manner so as to 
permit the operation of the blood bank and preparation of blood components 
under hygienic conditions and shall avoid the entry of insects, rodents and flies. 
It shall be well lighted, ventilated and screened (mesh), wherever necessary. 
The walls and floors of the rooms, where collection of blood or preparation of 
blood components of blood products is carried out shall be smooth, washable 
and capable of being kept clean. Drains shall be of adequate size and whe re 
connected directly to a sewer, shall be equipped with traps to prevent back 
siphonage. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. Health, clothing and sanitation of staff —The employees shall be free 
from contagious or infectious diseases. They shall be provided with clean 
overalls, headgea r, foot -wears and gloves, wherever, required. There shall be 
adequate, clean and convenient hand washing and toilet facilities. 
B. Accommodation for a Blood Bank 
A blood bank shall have an area of 100 square metres for its operations and 
an additional a rea of 50 square metres for preparation of blood components. It 
shall be consisting of a room each for— 
(1) Registration and medical examination with adequate furniture and 
facilities for registration and selection of donors; 
(2) Blood collection (air-conditioned); 
(3) Blood component preparation. (This shall be air -conditioned to 
maintain Temperature between 20 degree centigrade to 25 degree 
centigrade); 
(4) Laboratory for blood group serology (air conditioned); 
(5) Laboratory for blood transmissi ble diseases like Hepatitis, Syphilis, 
Malaria, HIV-antibodies (air-conditioned); 
(6) Sterilization-cum-washing; 
(7) Refreshment-cum-rest room (air-conditioned); 
(8) Store-cum-records. 
Notes.— 
(1) The above requirements as to accommodation and are a may be relaxed, 
in respect of testing laboratories and sterilization -cum-washing room, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing by the licensing authority and/or the Central 
Licence approving Authority, in respect of blood banks operating in hospitals, 
provided the hospital concerned has a pathological laboratory and a 
sterilization-cum-washing room common with other departments in the said 
hospital. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(2) Refreshments to the donor after phlebotomy shall be served so that he is 
kept under observation in the Blood Bank. 
C. Personnel 
Every blood bank shall have following categories of whole time competent 
technical staff:— 
(a) Medical Officer, possessing the qualifications specified in condition (i) of 
rule 122G. 
(b) Blood Bank Technician(s), possessing:— 
(i) Degree in Medical Laboratory Technology (M.L.T.) with six 
months' experience in the testing of blood and/or its components; or 
(ii) Diploma in Medical Laboratory Technology (M.L.T.) with 
one year's experience in the testing of blood and/or its components, the 
degree or diploma being from a University/Institution recognised by the 
Central Government or State Government. 
(c) Registered Nurse(s). 
(d) Technical supervisor (where blood components are manufactured), 
possessing— 
(i) Degree in Medical Laboratory Technology (M.L.T.) with six 
month's experience in the preparation of blood components; or 
(ii) Diploma in Medical Laboratory Technology (M.L.T.) with 
one year's experience in the preparation of blood components, 
the degree or diplom a being from a University/Institution recognised by the 
Central Government or State Government. 
Notes.— 
(1) The requirements of qualification and experience in respect of 
Technical Supervisor and Blood Bank Technician shall apply in the cases of 
persons who are approved by the licensing authority and/or Central Licence 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Approving Authority after the commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics 
(Amendment) Rules, 1999*1070. 
(2) As regards, the number of whole time competent techni cal personnel, 
the blood bank shall comply with the requirements laid down in the Directorate 
General of Health Services Manual. 
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to ensure through 
maintenance of records and other latest techniques used in blood banking 
system that the personnel involved in blood banking activities for collection, 
storage, testing and distribution are adequately trained in the current Good 
Manufacturing Practices/Standard Operating Procedures for the tasks 
undertaken by each personnel. The personnel shall be made aware of the 
principles of Good Manufacturing Practices/Standard Operating Procedures that 
affect them and receive initial and continuing training relevant to their needs. 
D. Maintenance 
The premises shall be maintained in a clean and proper manner to ensure 
adequate cleaning and maintenance of proper operations. The facilities shall 
include— 
(1) Privacy and thorough examination of individuals to determine their 
suitability as donors. 
(2) Collection of blood from donors with m inimal risk of contamination 
or exposure to activities and equipment unrelated to blood collection. 
(3) Storage of blood or blood components pending completion of tests. 
(4) Provision for quarantine, storage of blood and bl ood components in 
 a designated location, pending repetition of those tests that initially give 
questionable serological results. 
(5) Provision for quarantine, storage, handling and disposal of products 
and reagents not suitable for use. 
(6) Storage of finished products prior to distribution or issue. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(7) Proper collection, processing, compatibility testing, storage and 
distribution of blood and blood components to prevent contamination. 
(8) Adequate and proper performance of all procedures rel ating to 
plasmapheresis, plateletpheresis and leucapheresis. 
(9) Proper conduct of all packaging, labelling and other finishing 
operations. 
(10) Provision for safe and sanitary disposal of— 
(i) Blood and/or blood components not suitable for use, distribution 
or sale. 
(ii) Trash and items used during the collection, processing and 
compatibility testing of blood and/or blood components. 
E. Equipment 
Equipment used in the collection, processing, testing, storage and 
sale/distribution of blood and its compon ents shall be maintained in a clean and 
proper manner and so placed as to facilitate cleaning and maintenance. The 
equipment shall be observed standardised and calibrated on a regularly 
scheduled basis as described in the Standard Operating Procedures Manu al and 
shall operate in the manner for which it was designed so as to ensure 
compliance with the official requirements (the equipments) as stated below for 
blood and its components. 
Equipment that shall be observed, standardised and calibrated with at leas t 
the following frequencies:— 
Equipment Performance Frequency Frequency of Calibration 
1. Temperature 
recorder 
Compare against 
thermometer Daily As often as necessary 
2. Refrigerated 
centrifuge 
Observe speed and 
temperature 

Each day of use 
 As often as necessary 
3 Hematocrit 
Centrifuge ----------- -------- 
Standardize before initial 
use, after repair or 
adjustments, and annually 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Equipment Performance Frequency Frequency of Calibration 
4. General lab. 
Centrifuge ---------- --------------- Tachometer every 6 
months 
5. Automated 
Blood typing 
Observe controls for correct 
results 
Each day of use 
 ----------- 
6. Haemoglo-
binometer 
Standardize against 
cyanamethemoglobulin 
standard 
Each day of use -------------- 
7.` Refractometer Standardize against distilled 
water —ditto— ---------- 
8. Blood container 
weighing device 
Standardize against container 
of known weight —ditto— As often as necessary 
9. Water Bath Observe temperature —ditto— —ditto— 
10. 
Rh view box 
(wherever 
necessary) 
—ditto— —ditto— —ditto— 
11. Autoclave —ditto— Each day of use —ditto— 
12. Serologic 
rotators 
Observe controls for correct 
results Each day of use Speed as often as 
necessary 
13. Laboratory 
thermometers ------------ ---------- Before initial use 
14. Electronic 
thermometers ---------- Monthly ---------- 
15. Blood agitator 
Observe weight of the first 
container of blood filled for 
correct results. 
Each day of use 
Standardize with container 
of known mass or volume 
before initial use, and after 
repairs or adjustments 

F. Supplies and Reagents 
All supplies and reagents used in the collecti on, processing, compatibility, 
testing, storage and distribution of blood and blood components shall be stored 
at proper temperature in a safe and hygienic place, in a proper manner and in 
particular— 
(a) All supplies coming in contact with blood and bl ood components 
intended for transfusion shall be sterile, pyrogen -free, and shall not interact 
with the product in such a manner as to have an adverse effect upon the 
safety, purity, potency or effectiveness of the product. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) Supplies and reagents that do not bear an expiry date shall be stored in 
a manner that the oldest is used first. 
(c) Supplies and reagents shall be used in a manner consistent with 
instructions provided by the manufacturer. 
(d) All final containers and closures for blood and blood components not 
intended for transfusion shall be clean and free of surface solids and other 
contaminants. 
(e) Each blood collecting container and its satellite container(s), if any, 
shall be examined visually for damage or evidence of contaminati on prior to 
its use and immediately after filling. Such examination shall include 
inspection for breakage of seals, when indicated and abnormal discoloration. 
Where any defect is observed, the container shall not be used of if detected 
after filling, shall be properly discarded. 
(f) Representative samples of each lot of the following reagents and/or 
solutions shall be tested regularly on a scheduled basis by methods described 
in the Standard Operating Procedures Manual to determine their capacity to 
perform as required. 
Reagents and solutions Frequency of testing alongwith controls 
Anti-human serum Each day of use 
Blood grouping serums Each day of use 
Lectin Each day of use 
Antibody screening and reverse grouping cells. Each day of use 
Hepatitis test reagents Each run 
Syphilis serology reagents Each run 
Enzymes Each day of use 
HIV I and II reagents Each run 
Normal saline (LISS and PBS) Each day of use 
Bovine Albumin Each day of use 
G. Good Manufacturing Practices (GMPs)/Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Written Standard Operating Procedures shall be maintained and shall 
include all steps to be followed in the collection, processing, compatibility 
testing, storage and sale or distribution of blood and/or preparation o f blood 
components for homologous transfusion, autologous transfusion and further 
manufacturing purposes. Such procedures shall be available to the personnel for 
use in the concerned areas. The Standard Operating Procedures shall inter alia 
include:—• 
1. (a) Criteria used to determine donor suitability; 
(b) methods of performing donor qualifying tests and measurements 
including minimum and maximum values for a test or procedure, when a 
factor in determining acceptability; 
(c) solutions and methods us ed to prepare the site of phlebotomy so as 
to give maximum assurance of a sterile container of blood; 
(d) method of accurately relating the product(s) to the donor; 
(e) blood collection procedure, including in -process precautions taken 
to measure accurately the quantity of blood drawn from the donor; 
(f) methods of component preparation including, any time restrictions 
for specific steps in processing. 
(g) all tests and repeat tests performed on blood and blood components 
during processing; 
(h) pre-transfusion testing, wherever applicable, including precautions 
to be taken to identify accurately the recipient blood components during 
processing; 
(i) procedures of managing adverse reactions in donor and recipient 
reactions; 
(j) storage temperatures and methods of controlling storage temperatures 
for blood and its components and reagents; 
(k) length of expiry dates, if any, assigned for all final products; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(1) criteria for determining whether returned blood is suitable for reissue; 
(m) procedures used for relating a unit of blood or blood component from 
the donor to its final disposal; 
(n) quality control procedures for supplies and reagents employed in 
blood collection, processing and re-transfusion testing; 
(o) schedules and procedures for equipment maintenance and calibration; 
(p) labelling procedures to safeguard its mix -ups, receipt, issue, rejected 
and inhand; 
(q) procedures of plasmapheresis, plateletpheresis and leucapheresis if 
performed, including precautions to be taken to ensure re -infusion of 
donor's own cells; 
(r) procedures for preparing recovered (salvaged) plasma if performed, 
including details of separation, pooling, labelling, storage and 
distribution; 
(s) all records pertinent to the lot or unit maintained pursuant to these 
regulations shall be reviewed before the release or distribution of a lot or 
unit of final product. The review or portions of the review may be 
performed at appropriate periods during or after blood collection, 
processing, testing and storage. A thorough inve stigation, including the 
conclusions and follow-up, of any unexplained discrepancy or the failure 
of a lot or unit to meet any of its specification shall be made and 
recorded. 
2. A licensee may utilise current Standard Operating Procedures, such as 
the manuals of the following organisations, so long as such specific procedures 
are consistent with, and at least as stringent as, the requirements contained in 
this part, namely:— 
(i) Directorate General of Health Services Manual. 
(ii) Other Organisations or individual blood bank's manuals, subject to the 
approval of State licensing authority and Central Licence Approving 
Authority. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
H. Criteria for Blood Donation 
Conditions for donation of blood: 
(1) General—No person shall donate blood and no blood bank shall draw 
blood from a person, more than once in three months. The donor shall be in 
good health, mentally alert and physically fit and shall not be inmates of jail, 
persons having multiple sex partners and drug -addicts. The donors shall fulfil 
the following requirements, namely:— 
1071[(a) the donor shall be in the age group of 18 to 65 years;] 
(b) the donor shall not be less than 45 kilograms; 
(c) temperature and pulse of the donor shall be normal; 
(d) the systolic an d diastolic blood pressures are within normal limits 
without medication; 
(e) haemoglobin which shall not be less than 12.5 grams; 
(f) the donor shall be free from acute respiratory diseases; 
(g) the donor shall be free from any skin diseases at th e site of 
phlebotomy; 
(h) the donor shall be free from any disease transmissible by blood 
transfusion, insofar as can be determined by history and examination 
indicated above; 
(i) the arms and forearms of the donor shall be free from skin punctures or 
scars indicative of professional blood donors or addiction of self injected 
narcotics. 
(2) Additional qualifications of a donor —No person shall donate blood, 
and no blood bank shall draw blood from a donor, in the conditions mentioned 
in column (1) of the Table given below before the expiry of the period of 
deferment mentioned in the column (2) of the said Table. 
Table: Deferment of blood donation 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
S. No. Conditions Period of Deferment 
(1) (2) (3) 
(a) Abortions 6 months 
(b) History of Blood transfusion 6 months 
(c) Surgery 12 months 
(d) Typhoid 12 months after recovery 
(e) History of Malaria and duly treated 3 months (endemic) 
3 years (non endemic area) 
(f) Tatto 6 months 
(g) Breast feeding 12 months after delivery 
(h) Immunization (Cholera), Typhoid, Diphtheria 
 Tetanus, Plague, Gammaglobulin 15 days 
(i) Rabies vaccination 1 year after vaccination 
(i) History of Hepatitis in family of close 
 contact 12 months 
(k) Immunoglobulin 12 months 

(3) No person shall donate blood and no bloo d bank shall draw blood from a 
person, suffering from any of the diseases mentioned below, namely:— 
(a) Cancer 
(b) Heart disease 
(c) Abnormal bleeding tendencies 
(d) Unexplained weight loss 
(e) Diabetes-controlled on Insulin 
1072[(f) Hepatitis infection] 
(g) Chronic nephritis 
(h) Signs and symptoms, suggestive of AIDS 
(i) Liver disease 
(j) Tuberculosis 
(k) Polycythemia Vera 
(1) Asthma 
(m) Epilepsy 
(n) Leprosy 
(o) Schizophrenia 
(p) Endocrine disorders 

I. General Equipments and Instruments 
1. For blood collection room: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(i) Donor beds, chairs and tables : These shall be suitably and 
comfortably cushioned and shall be of appropriate size. 
(ii) Bedside table. 
(iii) Sphygmomanometer and Stethoscope. 
(iv) Recovery beds for donors. 
(v) Refrigerators, for storing separately tested and untested blood, 
maintaining temperature between 2 to 6 degree centigrade with digital 
dial thermometer, recording thermograph and alarm device, with 
provision for continuous power supply. 
(vi) Weighing devices for donor and blood containers. 
2. For haemoglobin determination : 
(i) Copper sulphate solution (specific gravity 1.053) 
(ii) Sterile lancet and impregnated alcohol swabs. 
(iii) Capillary tube (1.3 x 1.4 x 96 mm or pasteur pipettes) 
(iv) Rubber bulbs for capillary tubings. 
(v) Sahli's haemoglobinometer/Colorimeteric method. 
3. For temperature and pulse determination: 
(i) Clinical thermometers. 
(ii) Watch (fitted with a seconds-hand) and a stop-watch. 
4. For blood containers: 
(a) Only disposable PVC blood bags shall be used (closed system) as 
per the specifications of IP/UPS/BP. 
(b) Anti-coagulants: The anti -coagulant solution shall be sterile, 
pyrogen-free and of the followi ng composition that will ensure 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
satisfactory safety and efficacy of the whole blood and/or for all the 
separated blood components. 
(i) Citrate Phosphate Dextrose Adenine solution (CPDA) or Citrate 
Phosphate Dextrose Adenine -1 (CPDA -1) — 14 ml. solution shall be 
required for 100 ml of blood. 
Note 1.—(i) In case of single/double/triple/quadruple blood collection bags used 
for blood component preparations, CPDA blood collection bags may be 
used. 
(ii) Acid Citrate Dextrose solution (A.C.D. with Formula -A), I.P. —15 
ml solution shall be required for 100 ml of blood. 
(iii) Additive solutions such as SAGM, ADSOL, NUTRICEL may be 
used for storing and retaining Red Blood Corpuscles upto 42 days. 
Note 2. —The licensee shall ensure that the anti -coagulant solu tions are of a 
licensed manufacturer and the blood bags in which the said solutions are 
contained have a certificate of analysis of the said manufacturer. 
5. Emergency equipments/items: 
(i) Oxygen cylinder with mask, gauge and pressure regulator. 
(ii) 5 per cent. Glucose or Normal Saline. 
(iii) Disposable sterile syringes and needles of various sizes. 
(iv) Disposable sterile I.V. infusion sets. 
(v) Ampoules of Adrenaline, Noradrenaline, Mephentin, Betamethasone 
or Dexamethasone, Metoclorpropamide injections. 
(vi) Aspirin. 
6. Accessories: 
(i) Such as blankets, emesis basins, haemostats, set clamps, sponge 
forceps, gauze, dressing jars, solution jars, waste cans. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(ii) Medium cotton balls, 1.25 cm. adhesive tapes. 
(iii) Denatured spirit, Tincture iodine, green soap or liquid soap. 
(iv) Paper napkins or towels. 
(v) Autoclave with temperature and pressure indicator. 
(vi) Incinerator 
(vii) Stand-by generator. 
7. Laboratory equipment: 
(i) Refrigerators, for storing d iagnostic kits and reagents, maintaining a 
temperature between 4 to 6 degree centigrade (plus/minus 2 degree 
centigrade) with digital dial thermometer having provision for 
continuous power supply. 
(ii) Compound Microscope with low and high power objectives. 
(iii) Centrifuge Table Model 
(iv) Water bath : having range between 37 degree centigrade to 56 
degree centigrade 
(v) Rh viewing box in case of slide technique. 
(vi) Incubator with thermostatic control. 
(vii) Mechanical shakers for serological tests for Syphilis. 
(viii) Hand-lens for observing tests conducted in tubes. 
(ix) Serological graduated pipettes of various sizes. 
(x) Pipettes (Pasteur) 
(xi) Glass slides 
(xii) Test tubes of various sizes/micrometer plates (U or V type) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(xiii) Precipitating tubes 6 mm x 50 mm of different sizes and glass 
beakers of different sizes. 
(xiv) Test tube racks of different specifications. 
(xv) Interval timer electric or spring wound. 
(xvi) Equipment and materials for cleaning glass wares adequately. 
(xvii) Insulated containers for transporting blood, between 2 degree 
centigrade to 10 degree centigrade temperatures, to wards and 
hospitals. 
(xviii) Wash bottles 
(xix) Filter papers 
(xx) Dielectric tube sealer. 
(xxi) Plain and EDTA vials 
(xxii) Chemical balance (wherever necessary) 
(xxiii) ELISA reader with printer, washer and micropipettes. 
J. Special Reagents 
(1) Standard blood grouping sera Anti A, Anti B and Anti D with known 
controls. Rh typing sera shall be in double quantity and each of different 
brand or if from the same supplier each supply shall be of different lot 
numbers. 
(2) Reagents for serological tests of syphilis and positive sera for 
controls. 
(3) Anti Human Globulin Serum (Coomb's serum) 
(4) Bovine Albumi n 22 per cent Enzyme reagents for incomplete 
antibodies. 
1073[(5) ELISA or Rapid RPHA test kits for Hepatitis and HIV I & II.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(6) Detergent and other agents for cleaning laboratory glass wares. 
K. Testing of whole Blood 
(1) It shall be responsibility of the licensee to ensure that the whole 
blood collected, processed and supplied conforms to the standards laid down 
in the Indian Pharmacopoeia and other tests published, if any, by the 
Government. 
(2) Freedom from HIV antibo dies (AIDS) Tests -Every licensee shall 
get samples of every blood unit tested, before use, for freedom from HIV I 
and HIV II antibodies either from laboratories specified for the purpose by 
the Central Government or in his own laboratory. The results of su ch testing 
shall be recorded on the label of the container. 
(3) Each blood unit shall also be tested for freedom from 1074[Hepatitis 
B surface antigen and Hepatitis C virus antibody], VDRL and malarial 
parasite and results of such testing shall be recorded on the label of the 
container. 
Note.—(a) Blood samples of donors in pilot tube and the blood samples of the 
recipient shall be preserved for 7 days after issue. 
(b) The blood intended for transfusion shall not be frozen at any stage. 
(c) Blood containers shall not come directly in contact with ice at any 
stage. 

L. Records 
The records which the licensee is required to maintain shall include inter 
alia the following particulars, namely:— 
(1) Blood donor record: —It sh all indicate serial number, date of bleeding, 
name, address and signature of donor with other particulars of age, weight, 
haemoglobin, blood grouping, blood pressure, medical examination, bag 
number and patient's detail for whom donated in case of replacem ent donation, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
category of donation (voluntary/replacement) and deferral records and signature 
of Medical Officer Incharge. 
(2) Master records for blood and its components: —It shall indicate bag serial 
number, date of collection, date of expiry, quantity in ml. ABO/Rh Group, 
results for testing of HIV I and HIV II antibodies, Malaria, V.D.R.L., 2[Hepatitis 
B surface antigen and Hepatitis C virus antibody] and irregular antibodies (if 
any), name and address of the donor with particulars, utilisation issue number, 
components prepared or discarded and signature of the Medical Officer 
Incharge. 
(3) Issue register:—It shall indicate serial number, date and time of issue, bag 
serial number, ABO/Rh Group, total quantity in ml. name and address of the 
recipient, group of recipient, unit/institution, details of cross -matching report, 
indication for transfusion. 
(4) Records of components supplied:—quantity supplied; compatibility report, 
details of recipient and signature of issuing person. 
(5) Records of A. C.D./C.P.D/CPD-A/SAGM bags giving details of 
manufacturer, batch number, date of supply, and results of testing. 
(6) Register for diagnostic kits and reagents used:—name of the kits/reagents, 
details of batch number, date of expiry and date of use. 
(7) Blood bank must issue the cross matching report of the blood to the patient 
together with the blood unit. 
(8) Transfusion adverse reaction records. 
(9) Records of purchase, use and stock in hand of disposable needles, 
syringes, blood bags, shall be maintained. 
Note.—The above said records shall be kept by the licensee for a period of five 
years. 
M. Labels 
The labels on every bag containing blood and/or component shall contain 
the following particulars, namely:— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(1) The proper name of the product in a prominent place and in bold letters on 
the bag. 
(2) Name and address of the blood bank 
(3) Licence number 
(4) Serial number 
(5) The date on which the blood is drawn and the date of expiry as prescribed 
under Schedule P to these rules. 
(6) A coloured label shall be put on every bag containing blood. The following 
colour scheme for the said labels shall be used for different groups of blood: 
Blood Group Colour of the label 
O Blue 
A Yellow 
B Pink 
AB White 

(7) The results of the tes ts of 1075[Hepatitis B surface antigen and Hepatitis C 
virus antibody], syphilis, freedom from HIV I and HIV II antibodies and 
malarial parasite. 
(8) The Rh group. 
(9) Total volume of blood, the preparation of blood, natur e and percentage of 
anti-coagulant. 
(10) Keep continuously temperature at 2 degree centigrade to 6 degree 
centigrade for whole human blood and/or components as contained under III of 
Part XIIB. 
(11) Disposable transfusion sets with filter shall be us ed in administration 
equipment. 
(12) Appropriate compatible cross matched blood without a typical antibody 
in recipient shall be used. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(13) The contents of the bag shall not be used if there is any visible evidence 
of deterioration like haemolysis, clotting or discoloration. 
(14) The label shall indicate the appropriate donor classification like 
"Voluntary Donor" or "Replacement Donor" in no less prominence than the 
proper name. 
Notes.—1. In the case of blood components, particulars of the blood fr om 
which such components have been prepared shall be given against item 
numbers (5), (7), (8), (9) and (14). 
2. The blood and/or its components shall be distributed on the 
prescription of a Registered Medical Practitioner. 
II. BLOOD DONATION CAMPS 
A blood donation camp may be organised by— 
(a) a licensed designated Regional Blood Transfusion Centre; or 
(b) a licensed Government blood bank; or 
(c) the Indian Red Cross Society 
1076[(d) a licensed blood bank run by registered voluntary or 
 charitable organization recognized by State or Union territory Blood 
Transfusion Council; or 
(e) a private hospital blood bank.] 
Notes.—(i) "Designated Regional Blood Transfusion Centre" shall be a centre 
approved and designated by a Blood Transfusion Council constituted by a State 
Government to collect, process and distribute blood and its components to cater 
to the needs of the region and that centre has also been licensed and approved 
by the Licensing Authority and Central Licence Approving Authority for the 
purpose. 
(ii) The designated Regional Blood Transfusion Centre, Government blood 
bank and Indian Red Cross Society shall intimate within a period of seven days, 
the venue where blood camp was held and details of group wi se blood units 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
collected in the said camp to the Licensing Authority and Central Licence 
Approving Authority. 
For holding a blood donation camp, the following requirements shall be 
fulfilled/ complied with, namely:— 
(A) Premises, Personnel etc. 
(a) Premises under the blood donation camp shall have sufficient area 
and the location shall be hygienic so as to allow proper operation, 
maintenance and cleaning. 
(b) All information regarding the personnel working, equipment used 
and facilities available a t such a Camp shall be well documented and 
made available for inspection, if required, and ensuring— 
(i) continuous and uninterrupted electrical supply for equipment 
used in the Camp. 
(ii) adequate lighting for all the required activities; 
(iii) hand-washing facilities for staff; 
(iv) reliable communication system to the central office of the 
Controller/ Organiser of the Camp; 
(v) furniture and equipment arranged within the available place; 
(vi) refreshment facilities for donors and staff; 
(vii) facilities for medical examination of the donors; 
(viii) proper disposal of waste. 
(B) Personnel for Out-door Blood Donation Camp 
To collect blood from 50 to 70 donors in about 3 hours or from 100 to 120 
donors in 5 hours, the following req uirements shall be fulfilled/complied 
with:— 
(i) One medical Officer and two nurses or phlebotomists for managing 6 -8 
donor tables; 
(ii) two medico social workers; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(iii) three blood bank technicians; 
(iv) two attendants; 
(v) vehicle having a ca pacity to seat 8 -10 persons, with provision for 
carriage of donation goods including facilities to conduct a blood 
donation camp. 
C. Equipments 
1. BP apparatus. 
2. Stethoscope. 
3. Blood bags (single, double, triple, quadruple) 
4. Donor questionnaire. 
5. Weighing device for donors. 
6. Weighing device for blood bags. 
7. Artery forceps, scissors. 
8. Stripper for blood tubing. 
9. Bed sheets, blankets/mattress. 
10. Lancets, swab stick/tooth picks. 
11. Glass slides. 
12. Portable Hb meter/copper sulphate. 
13. Test tube (big) and 12x100 mm (small) 
14. Test tube stand. 
15. Anti-A, Anti-B and Anti-AB, Antisera and Anti-D 
16. Test tube sealer film. 
17. Medicated adhesive tape. 
18. Plastic waste basket 
19. Donor cards and refreshment for donors. 
20. Emergency medical kit. 
21. Insulated blood bag containers with provisions for storing between 
2 degree centigrade to 10 degree centigrade. 
22. Dielectric sealer or portable tube sealer. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
23. Needle destroyer (wherever necessary). 

III. PROCESSING OF BLOOD COMPONENTS FROM WHOLE 
BLOOD BY A BLOOD BANK 
The blood components shall be prepared by blood banks as a part of the 
blood Bank services. The conditions for grant or renewal of licence to prepare 
blood components shall be as follows:— 
(A) Accommodation 
(1) Rooms with adequate area and other specifications, for preparing blood 
components depending on quantum of work load shall be as specified in item B 
under the heading "I. BLOOD BANKS/BLOOD COMPONENTS" of this Part. 
(2) Preparation of blood components shall be carried out only under closed 
system using single, double, triple or quadruple plastic bags except for 
preparation of Red Blood Cells Concentrates, where single bags may be used 
with transfer bags. 
(B) Equipment 
(i) Air conditioner; 
(ii) Laminar air flow bench; 
(iii) Suitable refrigerated centrifuge; 
(iv) Plasma expresser; 
(v) Clipper and clips and or dielectric sealer; 
(vi) Weighing device; 
(vii) Dry rubber balancing material; 
(viii) Artery forceps, scissors; 
(ix) Refrigerator maintaining a temperature between 2 degree 
centigrade to 6 degree centigrade, a digital dial thermometer with 
recording thermograph and alarm device, with provision for 
continuous power supply; 
(x) Platelet agitator with incubator (wherever necessary); 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(xi) Deep freezers maintaining a temperature between minus 30 degree 
centigrade to minus 40 degree centigrade and minus 75 degree 
centigrade to minus 80 degree centigrade; 
(xii) Refrigerated Water bath for Plasma Thawing; 
(xiii) Insulated blood bag containers with provisions for storing at 
appropriate temperature for transport purposes 
(C) Personnel 
The whole time competent technical staff meant for processing of Blood 
Components (that is Medical Officer, Technical Supervisor, Blood Bank 
Technician and Registered Nurse) shall be as specified in item C, under the 
heading 'I. BLOOD BANKS /BLOOD COMPONENTS' or this Part. 
(D) Testing Facilities 
General: Facilities for A, B, AB and O groups a nd Rli(D) grouping . 
1077[Hepatitis B surface antigen and Hepatitis C virus antibody], VDRL, HIV I 
and HIV II antibodies and malarial parasites shall be mandatory for every blood 
unit before it is used for the preparation of bloo d components. The results of 
such testing shall be indicated on the label. 
(E) Categories of Blood Components 
(1) Concentrated Human Red Blood Corpuscles : 
The product shall be known as "Packed Red Blood Cells" that is Packed 
Red Blood Cells remaining after separating plasma from human blood. 
General Requirements: 
(a) Storage—Immediately after processing, the Packed Red Blood Cells 
shall be kept at a temperature maintained between 2 degree centigrade to 6 
degree centigrade. 
(b) Inspection—The compo nent shall be inspected immediately after 
separation of the plasma, during storage and again at the time of issue. The 
product shall not be issued if there is any abnormality in colour or physical 
appearance or any indication of microbial contamination. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(c) Suitability of Donor —The source blood for Packed Red Blood Cells 
shall be obtained from a donor who meets the criteria for blood donation as 
specified in item H under the heading "I. BLOOD BANKS/BLOOD 
COMPONENTS" of this Part. 
(d) Testing of Whole Blood— Blood from which Packed Red Blood Cells 
are prepared shall be tested as specified in item K relating to testing of 
whole blood under the heading "I. BLOOD BANKS/BLOOD 
COMPONENTS" of this Part . 
(e) Pilot Samples — Pilot samples collected in integr al tubing or in 
separate pilot tubes shall meet the following specifications:— 
(i) one or more pilot samples of either the original blood or of the 
Packed Red Blood Cells being processed shall be preserved with 
each unit of Packed Red Blood Cells which is issued. 
(ii) Before they are filled, all pilot sample tubes shall be marked 
or identified so as to relate them to the donor of that Unit or Packed 
Red Blood Cells. 
(iii) Before the final container is filled or at the time the final 
product is prepared, the pilot sample tubes accompanying a unit of 
Packed Red Blood Cells, shall be attached in a tamper -proof 
manner that shall conspicuously identify removal and re -
attachment. 
(iv) All pilot sample tubes, accompanying a unit of Packed Red 
Blood Cells, shall be filled immediately after the blood is collected 
or at the time the final product is prepared, in each case, by the 
person who performs the collection of preparation. 
(f) Processing— 
(i) Separation—Packed Red Blood Cells shall be separated from 
the whole blood— 
(a) if the whole blood is stored in ACD solution within 21 
days, and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) if the whole blood is stored in CPDA-1 solution, within 
35 days, from the date of collection. Packed Red Blood Cells 
may be prepared either by centrifugat ion done in a manner 
that shall not tend to increase the temperature of the blood or 
by normal undisturbed sedimentation method. A portion of 
the plasma, sufficient to ensure optimal cell preservation, 
shall be left with the Packed Red Blood Cells. 
(ii) Packed Red Blood Cells Frozen —Cryophylactic substance 
may be added to the Packed Red Blood Cells for extended 
manufacturer's storage not warmer than minus 65 degree 
centigrade provided the manufacturer submits data to the 
satisfaction of the licensing aut hority and Central Licence 
Approving Authority, as adequately demonstrating through in-vivo 
cells survival and other appropriate tests that the addition of the 
substance, the material used and the processing methods results in 
a final product meets the req uired standards of safety, purity and 
potency for Packed Red Blood Cells, and that the frozen product 
shall maintain those properties for the specified expiry period. 
(iii) Testing—Packed Red Blood Cells shall conform to the 
standards as laid down in the Indian Pharmacopoeia. 
(2) Platelets Concentrates— 
The product shall be known as "Platelets Concentrates" that is platelets 
collected from one unit of blood and re -suspended in an appropriate 
volume of original plasma. 
General Requirements: 
(i) Source—The source material for platelets shall be platelet -rich plasma 
or buffy coat which may be obtained from the whole blood or by 
plateletpheresis. 
(ii) Processing— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) Separation of buffy -coat or platelet -rich plasma and platelets 
and re -suspension of the platelets shall be in a closed system by 
centrifugal method with appropriate speed, force and time. 
(b) Immediately after collection, the whole blood or plasma shall 
be held in storage between 20 degree centigrade to 24 degree 
centigrade. When it is to be transported from the venue of blood 
collection to the processing laboratory, during such transport 
action, the temperature as close as possible to a range between 20 
degree centigrade to 24 degree centigrade shall be ensured. The 
platelet concentrates shall be separated within 6 hours after the 
time of collection of the unit of whole blood or plasma. 
(c) The time and speed of centrifugation shall be demonstrated to 
produce an unclamped product, without visible haemolysis, that 
yields a count of not l ess than 3.5 x IO 10 (3.5 x 10 raised to the 
power of 10) and 4.5 x IO 10 (4.5x10 raised to the power of ten) i.e. 
platelets per unit from a unit of 350 ml. and 450 ml. blood 
respectively. One percent of total platelets prepared * shall be 
tested of which 75 per cent of the units shall conform to the above 
said platelet count. , 
(d) The volume of original plasma used for resuspension of the 
platelets shall be determined by the maintenance of the pH of not 
less than 6 during the storage period. The pH shall be measured on 
a sample of platelets which has been stored for the permissible 
maximum expiry period at 20 degree centigrade to 24 degree 
centigrade. 
(e) Final containers used for platelets shall be colourless and 
transparent to permit visual ins pection of the contents. The caps 
selected shall maintain a hermetic seal to prevent contamination of 
the contents. The container material shall not interact with the 
contents, under the normal conditions of the storage and use, in 
such a manner as to have an adverse effect upon the safety, purity, 
potency, or efficacy of the product. At the time of filing, the final 
container shall be marked or identified by number so as to relate it 
to the donor. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(iii) Storage—Immediately after re-suspension, platelets shall be placed 
in storage not exceeding for a period of 5 days, between 20 degree 
centigrade to 24 degree centigrade, with continuous gentle agitation of 
the platelet concentrates maintained through such storage. 
(iv) Testing—The units prepared from different donors shall be tested at 
the end of the storage period for— 
(a) Platelet count; 
(b) pH of not less than 6 measured at the storage temperature of 
the unit; 
(c) measurement of actual plasma volume; 
(d) one per cent of the total platelets prepared shall be tested for 
sterility; 
(e) the tests for functional viability of the platelets shall be done 
by swirling movement before issue; 
(f) if the results of the testing indicate that the product does not 
meet the specified requirements, imm ediate corrective action 
shall be taken and records maintained. 
(v) Compatibility Test :—Compatible transfusion for the purpose of 
variable number of Red Blood Cells, A, B, AB and O grouping shall be 
done if the platelets concentrate is contaminated with red blood cells. 

(3) Granulocyte Concentrates— 
(i) Storage:—It shall be kept between 20 degree centigrade to 24 degree 
centigrade for a maximum period of 24 hours. 
(ii) Unit of granulocytes shall not be less than 1 x 10 10 (i.e. 1x10 raised 
to the power of 10) when prepared on cell separator. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(iii) Group specific tests/HLA test wherever required shall be carried 
out. 
(4) Fresh Frozen Plasma—- 
Plasma frozen within 6 hours after blood collection and stored at a 
temperature not warmer than min us 30 degree centigrade, shall be 
preserved for a period of not more than one year. 
(5) Cryoprecipitate— 
Concentrate of anti -hemophiliac factor shall be prepared by thawing of 
the fresh plasma frozen stored at minus 30 degree centigrade. 
(a) Storage—Cryoprecipitate shall be preserved at a temperature not 
higher than minus 30 degree centigrade and may be preserved for a 
period of not more than one year from the date of collection. 
(b) Activity—Anti-hemophiliac factor activity in the final product sh all 
be not less than 80 units per bag. One per cent of the total cryoprecipitate 
prepared shall be tested of which seventy five per cent of the unit shall 
conform to the said specification. 
F. Plasmapheresis, Plateletpheresis, Leucapheresis using A Cell Separator 
An area of 10 square metres shall be provided for apheresis in the blood 
bank. The blood banks specifically permitted to undertake the said apheresis on 
the donor shall observe the criteria as specified in item H relating to criteria for 
blood dona tion under the heading "I. BLOOD BANKS/BLOOD 
COMPONENTS" of the Part. The written consent of the donor shall be taken 
and the donor must be explained, the hazards of apheresis. The Medical Officer 
shall certify that donor is fit for apheresis and it shall be carried out by a trained 
person under supervision of the Medical Officer. 
(A) Plasmapheresis, Platelet Pheresis and Leucapheresis 
The donors subjected to plasmapheresis, plateletpheresis and leucopheresis 
shall, in addition to the criteria specified in item H relating to the criteria for 
blood donation, under the heading "I. BLOOD BANKS/BLOOD 
COMPONENTS" of this part being observed, be also subjected to protein 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
estimation on post -pheresis/first sitting whose results shall be taken as a 
reference for subs equent pheresis/sitting. It shall also be necessary that the 
total plasma obtained from such donor and periodicity of Plasmapheresis 
shall be according to the standards described under validated Standard 
Operating Procedures. 
Notes.—(i) At least 48 hours m ust elapse between successive apheresis and 
not more than twice in a week. 
(ii) Extracoporeal blood volume shall not exceed 15% of donor's 
estimated blood volume. 
(iii) Platelet pheresis shall not be carried out on donors who have taken 
medication containing Aspirin within 3 days prior to donation. 
(iv) If during plateletpheresis or leucapheresis, RBCs cannot be re -
transfused then at least 12 weeks shall elapse before a second 
cytapheresis procedure is conducted. 
(C) Monitoring For Apheresis 
Before starting apheresis procedure, haemoglobin or heamatocrit shall be 
done. Platelet count, WBC counts, differential count may be carried out. In 
repeated plasmapheresis, the serum protein shall be 6 gm./lOO ml. 
(D) Collection of Plasma 
The quantity of plasma separated from the blood of a donor shall not exceed 
500 ml. per sitting and once in a fortnight or shall not exceed 1000 ml. per 
month. 
PART XII C 
I. REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF BLOOD PRODUCTS 
The blood products shall be manufactured in a separ ate premises other than 
that meant for blood bank. The requirements that are essential for grant or 
renewal of licence to manufacture blood products such as Albumin, Plasma 
Protein Fraction, Immunoglobins and Coagulation Factor Concentrates, shall be 
as follows, namely:— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
A. General Requirements 
1. Location and surroundings, buildings and water supply—The requirements 
as regards location and surrounding, buildings and water supply as contained in 
paragraphs 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.3 of Part I of Schedule M shal l apply mutatis 
mutandis to the manufacture of blood products. 
2. Disposal of waste and infectious materials— 
(i) The requirement as regards disposal of waste and infectious 
materials as contained in paragraph 1.1.4 of Part I of Schedule M shall 
apply mutatis mutandis to the manufacture of blood products. 
(ii) Proper facility shall also be provided for potentially infectious 
materials, particularly HIV I and II, 1078[Hepatitis B surface antigen and 
Hepatitis C virus antibody] through autoclaving, incineration or any other 
suitable validated methods. 
3. Health, clothing and sanitation of personal:— 
(i) The requirement as contained in paragraph 3 of Part I of Schedule M 
shall be complied with. 
(ii) The personnel wo rking in the manufacturing areas shall be 
vaccinated against Hepatitis B virus and other infectious transmitting 
diseases. 
4. Requirements for manufacturing area for Blood Products— 
(i) For the manufacture of blood products, separate enclosed areas 
specifically designed for the purpose shall be provided. These areas be 
provided with air locks for entry and shall be essentially dust free and 
ventilated with an air supply for manufacturing area shall be filtered 
through bacteria retaining filters (HEPA Filters) and shall be at a pressure 
higher than in the adjacent areas. The filters shall be checked for 
performance on installation and periodically thereafter, and records 
thereof shall be maintained. 
(ii) Interior surfaces (walls, floors and ceilings) shall be smooth and 
free from cracks, they shall not shed matter and shall permit easy 
cleaning and disinfection. Drains shall be excluded from aseptic areas. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Routine microbial count of the manufacturing area shall be carried out 
during manufacturing oper ations. The results of such counts shall be 
checked against well documented in -house standards and records 
maintained. 
Access to the manufacturing areas shall be restricted to a minimum 
number of authorised personnel. Special procedures for entering and 
leaving of the manufacturing areas shall be prominently displayed. 
(iii) Sinks shall be excluded from aseptic areas. Any sink installed in 
other clean areas shall be of suitable material such as stainless steel, 
without an overflow, and be supplied with wate r of potable quality. 
Adequate precautions shall be taken to avoid contamination of the 
drainage system with dangerous effluents and airborne dissemination of 
pathogenic microorganisms. 
(iv) Lighting, air-conditioning, ventilation shall be designed to maintain 
a satisfactory temperature and relative humidity to minimise 
contamination and to take account of the comfort of personnels working 
with protective clothing. 
(v) Premises used for the manufacture of blood products shall be 
suitably designed and constructed to facilitate good sanitation. 
(vi) Premises shall be carefully maintained and it shall be ensured that 
repair and maintenance operations do not present any hazard to the 
quality of products. Premises shall be cleaned and, where applicable, 
disinfected according to detailed written validated procedures. 
(vii) Adequate facilities and equipments shall be used for the 
manufacture of blood products derived from blood plasma. 
(viii) All containers of blood products, regardless of the stage o f 
manufacture, shall be identified by securely attached labels. Cross 
contamination shall be prevented by adoption of the following measures, 
namely:— 
(a) processing and filling shall be in segregated areas; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) manufacture of different products at t he same time shall be 
avoided; 
(c) simultaneous filling of the different products shall be avoided; 
(d) ensure transfer, containers/materials by means of airlocks, air 
extraction, clothing change and careful washing and decontamination 
of equipment; 
(e) protecting containers/materials against the risk of contamination 
caused by re -circulation of untreated air or by accidental re -entry of 
extracted air; 
(f) using containers that are sterilised or are of documented low 
"bioburden". 
(ix) Positive pressure area shall be dedicated to the processing area 
concerned; 
(x) Air-handling units shall be dedicated to the processing area 
concerned; 
(xi) Pipe work, valves and vent filters shall be properly designed to 
facilitate cleaning and sterilisati on. Valves on fractionation/reacting 
vessels shall be completely steam -sterilisable. Air vent filters shall be 
hydrophobic and shall be validated for their designated use. 
5. Ancillary Areas— 
(i) Rest and refreshment rooms shall be separated from other areas. 
(ii) Facilities for changing and storing clothes and for washing and 
toilet purposes shall be easily accessible and appropriate for the number 
of users. Toilets shall not be connected directly with production or 
storage areas. 
(iii) Maintenance workshops shall be separated from production areas. 
Wherever parts and tools are stored in the production area, they shall be 
kept in rooms or lockers reserved for that use. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(iv) Animals houses shall be well isolated from other areas, with separate 
entrance. 
B. Collection and Storage of Plasma for Fractionation 
(a) Collection— 
(1) Plasma shall be collected from the licensed blood banks through a 
cold chain process and stored in frozen condition not warmer than minus 
twenty degree centigrade. 
(2) Individual plasma shall remain in quarantine till it is tested for 
1079[Hepatitis B surface antigen and Hepatitis C virus antibody] HIV I and 
HIV II. 
(3) A sample from pooled—lot plasma of about 10-12 units of different 
donors shall be tested of 1079[Hepatitis B surface antigen and Hepatitis C 
virus antibody] , HIV I and HIV II and if the sample found negative, only 
then it shall be taken up for fractionation. 
(b) Storage Area— 
(1) Storage areas shall be of sufficient space and capacity to allow 
orderly storage of the various categories of materials, intermediates, bulk 
and finished products, products in quarantine, released, rejected, returned, 
or recalled products. 
(2) Storage areas sha ll be designed or adopted to ensure good storage 
conditions. In particular, they shall be clean, dry and maintained within 
temperature required for such storage and where special storage 
conditions are required (e.g. temperature, humidity), these shall be 
provided, checked and monitored. 
(3) Receiving and dispatch bays shall protect materials and products 
from the weather and shall be designed and equipped to allow containers 
of incoming materials to be cleaned, if necessary, before storage. 
(4) Where quarantine status is ensured by storage in separate areas, 
these areas shall be clearly marked and their access restricted only to 
authorised personnel. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(5) There shall be separate sampling area for raw materials. If sampling 
is performed in the storage area, it shall be conducted in such a way so as 
to prevent contamination or cross-contamination. 
(6) Segregation shall be provided for the storage of rejected, recalled, or 
returned materials or products. 
(7) Adequate facility shall be provided for supply of ancillary material, 
such as ethanol, water, salts and polyethylene glycol. Separate facilities 
shall be provided for the recovery of organic solvents used in 
fractionation. 
C. Personnel— 
(1) Manufacture—The manufacture of blood products shall be conducted under 
the active direction and personal supervision of competent technical staff, 
consisting of at least one person who shall be a whole time employee, with one 
year practical experience in the manufacture of blood products/plasma 
fractionation and process— 
(a) Post-graduate degree in Medicine - M.D. (Microbiology / Pathology 
/ Bacteriology / Immunology / Biochemistry); or 
(b) Post-graduate degree in Science (Microbiology); or 
(c) Post-graduate degree in Pharmacy (Microbiology), from a r ecognised 
University or Institution. 
2. Testing—The head of the testing unit shall be independent of the 
manufacturing unit and testing shall be conducted under the active direction and 
personal supervision of competent technical staff consisting at least one person 
who shall be a whole time employee. The Head of the testing unit shall have 
eighteen months practical experience in the testing of drugs, especially the 
blood products and possesses— 
(a) Post-graduate degree in Pharmacy or Science - 
(Chemistry/Microbiology/ Bio-chemistry); or 
(b) Post-graduate degree in Medicine - M.D. (Microbiology/Pathology/ 
Biochemistry); from a recognised University or Institution. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
D. Production Control 
(1) The production area and the viral inactivation room shall be centrally air-
conditioned and fitted with HEPA Filters having Grade C (Class 10,000) 
environment as given in the Table below. 
(2) The filling and sealing shall be carried out under aseptic conditions in 
centrally air-conditioned areas fitted with HEPA Filters having Grade A or, as 
the case may be, grade B (Class 100) environment given in the said Table. 
Table—Air Classification system for Manufacture of Sterile Products 
Grade 
Maximum number of particles 
permitted per m3 
Maximum Number of Viable 
Micro-organism permitted per m3 
0.5-5 
micron Less than 5 micron 
A (Class 100) 
(Laminar-Air flow 
workstation) 
3500 None Less than 1 
B (Class 100) 3500 None Less than 5 
C (Class 10000) 3,50,000 2,000 Less than 100 

(3) The physical and chemical operations used for the manufacture of plasma 
fractionation shall maintain high yield of safe and effective protein. 
(4) The fractionation procedure used shall give a good yield of products 
meeting the in -house quality requirements as approved by the li censing 
authority and Central Licence Approving Authority reducing the risk of 
microbiological contamination and protein denaturation to the minimum. 
(5) The procedure adopted shall not affect the antibody activity and biological 
half-life or biological characteristics of the products. 
E. Viral Inactivation Process 
The procedure used by the licensee to inactivate the pathogenic organisms such 
as enveloped and non-enveloped virus, especially infectivity from HIV I & HIV 
II, 1080[Hepatitis B surface antigen and Hepatitis C virus antibody] the viral 
inactivation and validation methods adopted by the licensee, shall be submitted 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
for approval to the licensing authority and Central Licence Approving 
Authority. 
Notes.—(1) No preservative (except stabiliser to prevent - protein denaturation 
such as glycine, sodium chloride or sodium caprylate) shall be added to 
Albumin, Plasma Protein Fraction, Intravenous Immunoglobulins or 
Coagulation Factor Concentrates without the prior approval of licensing 
authority and Central Licence Approving Authority. 
(2) The licensee shall ensure that the said stabilisers do not have deleterial effect 
on the final product in the quantity present so as not to cause any untoward or 
adverse reaction in human beings. 
F. Quality Control 
Separate facilities shall be provided for Quality Control such as Hematological, 
Bio-chemical, Physico -chemical, Microbiological, Pyrogens, Instrumental and 
Safely testing. The Quality Control Department shall have inter alia the 
following principal duties, namely:— 
(1) To prepare detailed instructions, in writing for carrying out test and 
analysis. 
(2) To approve or reject raw material, components, containers, closures, 
in-process materials, packaging material, labelling and finished products. 
(3) To release or reject batch of finished products which are ready for 
distribution. 
(4) To evaluate the adequacy of the conditions under which raw 
materials, semi-finished products and finished products are stored. 
(5) To evaluate the quality and stability to finished products and when 
necessary of raw materials and semi-finished products. 
(6) To review production records to ensure that no errors have occurred 
or if errors have occurred that they have been fully investigated. 
(7) To approve or reject all procedures or specifications impacting on 
the identity, strength, quality and purity of the product. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(8) To establish shelf -life and storage requirements on the basis of 
stability tests related to storage conditions. 
(9) To establish and when necessary revise, control procedures and 
specifications. 
(10) To review complaints, recalls, returned or salvaged products and 
investigations conducted thereunder for each product. 
(11) To review Master Formula Records/Cards periodically. 
G. Testing of Blood Products 
The products manufactured shall conform to the standards specified in the 
Indian Pharmacopoeia and where standard of any product is not specified in the 
Pharmacopoeia, the standard for such product shall conform to the standard 
specified in the United States Pharmacopoeia or the British Pharmacopoeia. The 
final products shall be tested for freedom from HIV I and HIV II antibodies, 
1081[Hepatitis B surface antigen and Hepatitis C virus antibody]. 
H. Storage of Finished Product 
(i) The final products shall be stored between two degree centigrade to eight 
degree centigrade, unless otherwise specified by the Central Licence Approving 
Authority. 
(ii) The shelf-life assigned to the products by the licensee shall be submitted for 
approval to the licensing authority and Central Licence Approving Authority. 
I. Labelling 
The products manufactured shall be labelled as specified in the Indian 
Pharmacopoeia, the British Pharmacopoeia or the United States' Pharmacopoeia 
which shall be in addition to any other requirement stated under part IX or Part 
X of these rules. The labels shall indicate the results of tests for 1082[Hepatitis B 
surface antigen and Hepatitis C virus antibody] freedom from HIV I and HIV II 
antibodies. 
J. Records 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
The licensee shall maintain records as per Schedule U and also comply with 
Batch manufacturing records as specified in Paragraph 9 of Part I of Schedule 
M and any other requirement as may be dir ected by licensing authority and 
Central Licence Approving Authority. 
K. Master Formula Records 
The licensee shall maintain Master Formula Records relating to all 
manufacturing and quality control procedures for each product, which shall be 
prepared and en dorsed by the competent Technical Staff, i.e. Head of the 
manufacturing unit. The Master Formula Records shall contain— 
(i) the patent or proprietary name of the product alongwith the generic 
name if any, strength and the dosage form; 
(ii) a descript ion or identification of the final containers, packing 
materials, labels and closures to be used; 
(iii) the identity, quantity and quality of each raw material to be used 
irrespective of whether or not it appears in the finished product. The 
permissible overage that may be included in a formulated batch shall be 
indicated; 
(iv) a description of all vessels and equipments and the sizes used in the 
process. 
(v) manufacturing and control instructions along with parameters for 
critical steps such as mi xing, drying, blending, sieving and sterilising the 
product; 
(vi) the theoretical yield to be expected from the formulation at 
different stages of manufacture and permissible yield limits; 
(vii) detailed instructions on precautions to be taken in the manufacture 
and storage of drugs and of semi-finished products; and 
(viii) the requirements in-process quality control tests and analysis to be 
carried out during each stage of manufacture including the designation of 
persons or departments responsible for the execution of such tests and 
analysis. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
II. REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF BLOOD PRODUCTS 
FROM BULK FINISHED PRODUCTS 
Where the blood products, such as Albumin, Plasma Protein Fraction, 
Immunoglobulins and Coagulation Factor Concentrates are manufa ctured 
through the manufacturing activities of filling and sealing the blood products 
from bulk powder or solution or both, the requirements as they apply to the 
manufacture of blood products from whole blood shall apply mutatis mutandis 
to such manufactur e of blood products, unless other requirements have been 
approved by the Central Licence Approving Authority.] 
1083[PART XIID 

REQUIREMENTS FOR COLLECTION, PROCESSING, TESTING, 
STORAGE, BANKING AND RELEASE OF UMBILICAL CORD 
BLOOD DERIVED STEM CELLS 

A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
1. Location, Surroundings and Building: The building(s) for storage of 
Umbilical cord blood shall be so situated and shall have such measures as to 
avoid risk of contamination from external environment includ ing open sewage, 
drain, public lavatory or any factory which produces disagreeable or obnoxious 
odour or fumes, excessive soot, smoke, chemical or biological emissions. 
2. Buildingand premises:(1) The premises used for processing and storage 
shall be de signed, constructed and adapted and maintained to ensure that the 
above operations and other ancillary functions are performed smoothly under 
hygienic conditions and in sterile areas wherever required. They shall also 
conform to the conditions, laid down in the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948). 
The premises shall be: 
(a) adequately provided with working space to allow orderly and logical 
placement of equipment, material and movement of personnel so as to 
maintain safe operations and prevent contamination; 
(b) designed/constructed/maintained to prevent entry of insects, pests, 
birds, vermins and rodents. Interior surfaces (walls, floors, ceilings and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
doors) shall be smooth and free from cracks, and permit easy cleaning, 
painting and disinfection, and in aseptic areas the surfaces shall be 
impervious, nonshedding, non-flaking and non-cracking; 
(c) flooring shall be unbroken and provided with a cove both at the 
junction between the wall and the floor as well as the wall and the ceiling; 
(d) provided with light fittings and grills which shall flush with the 
walls and not hanging from the ceiling to prevent contamination; 
(e) if provided with fire escapes, these shall be suitably installed in the 
walls without any gaps; 
(f) provided with the furni ture in a septic areas which is smooth, 
washable and made of stainless steel or any other appropriate non -
shedding material other than wood; 
(g) provided with separate areas for processing and storage of products 
to prevent mix-ups, product contaminations and cross-contamination; 
(h) provided with defined environmental conditions for temperature, 
humidity, ventilation, and air filtration. Classifications shall be defined 
and, if appropriate, monitored. 
(2) A periodical record of cleaning and renovatin g of the premises shall be 
maintained. 
3. Disposal of waste and infectious materials: 
(a) waste materials awaiting disposal shall be stored safely; 
(b) the disposal of sewage and effluents from the facility shall be in 
conformity with the requirements of the Pollution Control Board; 
(c) all bio -medical waste shall be dealt with in accordance with the 
provisions of the Bio -medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 
1996. 
4. Health, Clothing and Sanitation of personnel: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) all personnel shall undergo medical examination prior to 
employment and shall be free from infectious and contagious diseases 
and thereafter they should be medically examined periodically at least 
once a year and for this purpose records shall be maintained thereof; 
(b) all personnel, prior to and during employment, shall be trained in 
practices which ensure personal hygiene and a high level of personal 
hygiene shall be observed by all those engaged in the collection, 
processing, banking of umbilical cord blood; 
(c) all persons shall wear clean body coverings appropriate for their 
duties before entering the Processing Zone and the Change Rooms with 
adequate facilities shall be provided prior to entry into any specific zone; 
(d) smoking, eating, drinking, is prohibited inside the Laboratory; 
(e) all personnel working in the Laboratory shall be protected against 
virus infections. 
5. Requirements for Processing, Testing and Storage Areas for Umbilical 
cord blood stem cells: 
(a) separate dedicated areas spec ifically designed for the purpose and 
the workload shall be provided; 
(b) there shall be separate areas for designated work purposes, 
namely:— 
(i) Cord blood Reception: Cord blood reception area with space 
for transient storage of units and physical e xamination shall have 
adequate facilities for registration, data entry and generation of bar-
coded labels. Air condition area of at least 10.00 Sq. meters shall 
be provided; 
(ii) Cord blood processing area: The room shall be clean and 
have an air handlin g System to provide a Class 10,000 
environment. Entry to this area shall be through air lock. The room 
will house Class 100 biological safety cabinets for Umbilical cord 
blood processing. The temperature of the clean room shall be 
maintained 20 to 25°C and with a positive differential pressure of 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
10-15 pascals and Relative humidity of 50 - 60% Minimum area 
shall be 10.00 Sq. meters for the activity; 
(iii) Haematotogy and Serology Laboratory: The laboratory shall 
be equipped and utilized for the purpose of independently testing 
of Umbilical Cord Blood for ABO grouping and Rh Typing, Total 
Nucleated Cell Count, Progenitor Cell Count and viability test. The 
room shall be air -conditioned and area of at least 10.00 Sq. meters 
shall be provided. 
(iv) Transfusion Transmissible Disease Screening 
Laboratory:The Laboratory shall be equipped and utilized for 
screening tests on maternal blood for infectious diseases viz. HIV I 
& II; Hepatitis B & C virus, syphilis, malaria, CMV and HTLV. 
The room shall be air -conditioned and area of at least 10.00 Sq. 
meters shall be provided. 
(v) Sterility Testing Laboratory: The laboratory shall be used for 
performing Sterility tests on Umbilical cord blood unit. The 
premises may be classified depending on the testing method used . 
The room shall be air-conditioned with adequate and ancillary area 
for media preparation, sterilization, incubation and 
decontamination. Area of at least 10.00 Sq. meters shall be 
provided. 
(vi) HLA Typing Laboratory:The Umbilical cord blood Unit shall 
have arrangements for HLA typing and genetic disease testing. 
Inhouse testing can be done by providing a well demarcated 
Laboratory from the processing area for evaluation of possible 
genetic disease and HLA typing. The area shall have Class 100,000 
environment and air conditioned and area of at least 10.00 Sq. 
meters shall be provided. 
(vii) Sterilization-cum-washing:Appropriate facility shall be 
provided within the premises for proper washing and sterilization. 
This facility would be optional for Lab oratories using entirely 
disposable items. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(viii) Records and Store Rooms: There shall be designated record 
room(s) and store room(s) of at least 10.00 Sq. meters each. The 
access to record room shall be permitted only to authorized 
persons. The room wil l have adequate protective facilities as the 
documents and records are to be preserved for long years. 
(ix) Cryogenic Storage room:A minimum spate of 20.00 sq. meters 
shall be provided by the Licensee. The cryogenic storage room 
shall have provision for te mperature monitoring of storage vessels, 
liquid nitrogen level in storage vessels and oxygen meter. The 
service space between each liquid nitrogen storage vessel, supply 
cylinders and connecting hose should be minimum 1.00 sqr. 
meters. Separate storage spa ce for other accessories required shall 
be provided. The room shall be air-conditioned. 
(x) General Storage area:General storage area shall be provided to 
store all the consumables, under conditions deemed optimum for 
storage by manufacturers. 
B. COLLECTIO N AND STORAGE OF PROCESSES UMBILICAL 
CORD BLOOD COMPONENT 
1. Collection: 
(a) umbilical cord Wood specific for an individual will be collected 
after signing an agreement with the parents, whose child's umbilical cord 
blood is to be collected, and the cord blood bank. Private and Public 
Umbilical Cord Blood Banking to have different agreements; 
(b) umbilical cord blood shall be collected from hospitals, nursing 
homes, birthing centers and from any other place where a consenting 
mother delivers, under the supervision of the qualified Registered 
Medical Practitioner responsible for the delivery; 
(c) the cord blood shall be collected aseptically in a disposable PVC 
bag, containing adequate quantity of sterile, pyrogen free anti -coagulant 
and sealed ef fectively and such PVC Bags shall be procured from 
licensed manufacturer; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(d) the Umbilical cord blood would be collected from a premises 
operating in hygienic condition to allow proper operation, maintenance 
and cleaning. 
2. Transportation: 
(a) umbilical cord blood shall be transported from the birthing center to 
the designated laboratory under end as per procedure prescribed by the 
cord blood bank; 
(b) the transportation procedure shall be validated to ensure optimum 
survival of the Stem Cells; 
(c) the transportation temperature should be between 18 to 28°C; 
(d) the time period between collection and processing shall not exceed 
72 hours. 
3. Storage: 
(a) the Umbilical cord blood shall be stored at room temperature, 
between 20 to 25°C in the reception area prior to processing; 
(b) samples pending tests for specific transfusion transmittable infectious 
diseases shall be stored in a segregated manner. 
Note.—Temperature range between 4 to 37 degrees Celsius, for the whole 
time period of tra nsit may be allowed beyond the 18°C to 28°C in exceptional 
cases. The effects of deviation of transit temperature from the optimum, on the 
product shall be adequately explained by the licensee in the client education 
booklet. 
C. PERSONNEL 
Cord blood ban k shall have following categories of whole time competent 
technical staff, namely:— 
1. Medical Director:The operation of cord blood bank shall be conducted 
under the active directions and supervision of a Medical Director who is a 
whole time employee and is possessing a Post Graduate degree in Medicine - 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
MD (Pathalogy/ Transfusion Medicine/Microbiology) and has 
experience/training in cord blood processing and Cryogenic Storage. 
2. Laboratory In -charge:The laboratory in -charge shall have Post -
Graduate qualification in Physiology or Botany or Zoology or Cell Biology 
or Microbiology or Biochemistry or Life Sciences, or Graduate in Pharmacy 
and one year working experience in pathological laboratory licensed by the 
local health authority or any microbiology laboratory of a licensed drug 
manufacturing/testing unit and or experience/training in cord blood 
processing and cryogenic storage. 
3. Technical Supervisor (cord blood processing): The technical supervisor 
shall have a: 
(a) Degree in Physiology or Bo tany or Zoology, Pharmacy or Cell 
Biology or Bio Sciences or Microbiology or Biochemistry or Medical 
Laboratory Technology (M.L.T.) with minimum of three years of 
experience in the preparation of blood components and/or experience or 
training in cord blood processing and Cryogenic Storage; or 
(b) Diploma in Medical Laboratory Technology (M.L.T) with five 
years' experience in the preparation of blood components and experience 
or training in cord blood processing and Cryogenic Storage shall be 
essential. 
4. Cord Blood Bank Technicians):The technicians employed shall have a: 
(a) A Degree in Physiology or Botany or Zoology or Pharmacy or Cell 
Biology or Bio Science or Microbiology or Biochemistry or Medical 
Laboratory Technology (M.L.T.) with six months experience and or 
training in cord blood processing and cryogenic storage; or 
(b) Diploma in Medical Laboratory Technology (MLT) with one year 
experience in the testing of blood and/or its components and/or 
experience or training in cord blood processing and Cryogenic Storage. 
D. AIR HANDLING SYSTEMS 
1. Air handling for sterile areas shall be different from those for other areas. 
The filter configuration in the air handling system shall be suitably designed to 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
achieve the grade of air as given in the Table I. The environmental 
microbiological monitoring of clean areas shall be in accordance to the 
recommended limits given in Table II. 
2. The Processing area shall have HVAC system and fitted with HEPA Filters 
having Grade C (Class 10,000) environment as given in Table I. 
3. The entire processing shall be done conforming to Grade A (Class 100) 
Standard of air quality. 
TABLE I 
AIR BORNE PARTICULATE CLASSIFICATIONS FOR MANUFACTURE OF STERILE 
PRODUCTS 
Grade Maximum number of permitted particles per cubic meter equal to or above 
 At rest (b) In Operation (a) 
 0.5 µm 5 µm 0.5 µm 5µm 
A 3,500 0 3,500 0 
B(a) 3,500 0 3,50,000 2000 
C(a) 3,50,000 2000 35,00,000 20,000 
D(a) 35,00,000 20,000 Not defined Not defined 

Notes.— 
(a) In order to reach the B, C and D air grades, the number of air changes shall 
be related to the size of the room and the equipment and personnel present in 
the room. The air system shall be provided with the appropriate filters such as 
HEPA for Grades A, B and C. The maximum permitted number of particles in 
the "at rest" condition shall approximately be as under: 
[Grade A and B corresponds with class 100 or M 3.5 or class 5]; Grade C with 
Class 10,000 or M 5.5 or ISO Class 7; Grade D with Class 1,00,000 or M 6.5 or 
ISO Class 8. 
(b) The requirement and limit for the area shall depend on the nature of the 
operation carried out. 
TABLE II 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
RECOMMENDED LIMITS FOR MICROBIOLOGICAL MONITORING OF CLEAN 
AREAS "IN OPERATION" 
Grade Air Sample 
Cfu/ m3 
Settle Plates (dia 90 
mm) cfu/2 hrs. 
Contact plates (dia 55 
mm) cfu per plate 
Glove points (five 
fingers) cfu per glove 
A <1 <1 <1 <1 
B 10 5 5 5 
C 100 50 25 - 
D 500 100 50 - 
Notes.— 
(a) These are average values. 
(b) Individual settle plates may be exposed for not less than two hours in 
Grade B, C and D areas and for not less than thirty minutes in Grade A area. 
E. QUALITY CONTROL 
1. Facilities shall be provided for Quality Control such as Haematological, 
Microbiological and Instrumental testing. 
2. Following duties shall be performed under the function of quality 
control: 
(a) to prepare detailed instructions for carrying out such tests and 
analysis; 
(b) to approve or reject raw materials and consumables , used in any 
step, on the basis of approved specifications; 
(c) Haematological Tests like Total Nucleated Cell Counts, 
Mononuclear Cell Count, Enumeration of the population of Stem Cells, 
Stem Cell viability shall be performed on samples of processed u mbilical 
cord blood Unit; 
(d) microbiological Tests shall be done on Maternal Blood samples for 
freedom from Hepatitis B Surface Antigen, Hepatitis C Virus antibody, 
HIV I and II antibodies'. Syphilis, Malaria, CMV and HTLV. Bacterial 
and Fungal Culture shall be done on the umbilical cord blood Samples; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(e) instruments which would be used to process test and store the UCB 
unit would be validated before commissioning and calibrated from time 
to time to check their conformity to specific standards accor ding to an 
approved and valid protocol; 
(f) the environmental monitoring of the clean rooms would be done at 
periodic intervals according to an accepted and validated protocol; 
(g) all tests Mentioned above shall be done in house except tests under 
item numbers (e), (f) and test for enumeration of Stem Cell Population, 
HLA typing and "Genetic Disease Testing which may be outsourced to a 
competent third party approved by the licensing authority. 
F. SCREENING TESTS 
1. The maternal Blood sample shall be tested for 
(a) Hepatitis B; 
(b) Hepatitis C; 
(c) HIV 1 & 2; 
(d) Syphilis; 
(e) Malaria; 
(f) CMV; 
(g) HTLV. 

2. The Umbilical Cord Blood shall be tested for 

(a) Total Nucleated Cell Count; 
(b) Total Mononuclear Cell Count; 
(c) Progenitor Cell (CD34+) enumeration; 
(d) Cell Viability; 
(e) ABO Group and Rh Type; 
(f) Sterility as regards Bacterial and Fungal contamination status; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(g) HLA Matching (Only for allogenic Cord Blood Units). 
G. STORAGE 
1. The Umbilical cord blood shall be cryopreserved using a controlled 
rate freezing or equivalent validated procedures. The frozen storage shall 
be at minus (-) 196°C and shall not be warmer than minus (-) 150°C. 
2. There will be no shelf life for this class of product. 
H. REFERENCE SAMPLES 
1. At least two reference samples shall be collected from cord blood unit 
product prior to cryopreservation and stored at minus 196°C and shall not be 
warmer than minus 150°C. 
2. At least one additional reference sam ple shall be stored at minus 76°C 
or colder for the purposes other than viability analysis. 
I. LABELLING 
1. Initial Label placed during collection shall specify: 
(a) Human Umbilical Cord Blood; 
(b) Approximate Volume or weight of contents in the coll ection bag 
(UCB + Anticoagulant); 
(c) Mother's name; 
(d) Place of collection; 
(e) Date & Time of collection; 
(f) Collected by; 
(g) To be Labelled in bold, "ROOM TEMPERATURE ONLY -DO 
NOT REFRIGERATE, DO NOT IRRADIATE"; 
(h) Manufacturing licence number. 
2. Label at completion of processing and before issue - Cryogenic Storage 
Label (Statutory label) shall indicate the following:— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) Name of Product:—Human Progenitor Cell (HPC) - Cord Blood; 
(b) Volume or weight of contents; 
(c) Percentage of Cryoprotectant (DMSO); 
(d) Percentage of any other additive/preservant; 
(e) Date of collection (birth) ....................; 
(f) Date of processing....................; 
(g) Name of manufacturer....................; 
(h) Manufacturing licence number; 
(i) Storage temperature - not less than, - 196°C and shall not be warmer 
than -150°C; 
(j) Unique Traceability Number and/or BAR Code. 
3. Issue Label at the time of release of Cord Blood Unit shall indicate the 
following, namely:— 
(a) Name of manufacturer; 
(b) Licence number; 
(c) All details of the Cryogenic Storage Label; 
(d) The results of Total nucleated Cells, Progenitor Cell perc entage 
(CD34+),Viability; 
(e) Results of Transfusion Transmiltable diseases testing on maternal 
blood; 
(f) ABO Group and Rh Type; 
(g) Date of processing; 
(h) Result of HLA typing (allogenic); 
(i) Statement "Properly identify intended Recipient and Product"; 
(j) A statement indicating that leukoreduction filters should not be used; 
(k) Statement "Do not irradiate"; 
(1) Name and address of receiving hospital 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
J. RECORDS OR DOCUMENTATION 

1. The Licensee shall maintain the following records:— 
(a) Client/donor enrolment/agreement record; 
(b) Collection of unit and transportation record; 
(c) Master record of stored unit; 
(d) HLA Matching record; 
(e) Unit Release Register; 
(f) Stock Register for Blood Collection Bag Cryoprotectant and 
Preservant, RBC Sedimentation Enhancer; 
(g) Stock Register for Diagnostic Kits, Reagents and other 
consumables; 
(h) Record on feedback after use of cord blood/Adverse reaction record. 
2. The following Standard Operating Procedures shall be mainta ined by the 
licensee, namely:— 
(a) Umbilical cord blood collection; 
(b) Transportation of the collected Umbilical cord blood unit; 
(c) Processing of Umbilical cord blood unit; 
(d) Cryogenic Storage of processed Umbilical cord blood unit; 
(e) Testing of maternal blood for transfusion transmittable infections; 
(f) Testing of Umbilical cord blood for ABO Grouping and Rh Typing; 
(g) Testing of Umbilical cord blood unit for Total Nucleated Cell Count, 
Mononuclear Cell Count, Progenitor Cell (CD34+) enumeration, and 
Viability; 
(h) Testing of Umbilical cord blood stem cell Unit for Sterility; 
(i) Disposal of bio medical waste; 
(j) Dispensation of Umbilical cord blood unit; 
(k) Preventive maintenance Protocol for all Instruments; 
(1) Acceptance/Rejection procedure of consumables; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(m) Environment monitoring of classified areas; 
(n) Any other standard operative procedure as requirements. 
K. CORD BLOOD RELEASE 
1. There shall be designated area with adequate space for procedures 
and records related to cord blood unit selection and release. 
2. The cord blood bank shall obtain written or electronic request from 
the transplant physician or designee for shipment of the cord blood unit. 
3. Accompanying documentation at the time of issue, fro m the cord 
blood bank shall include indications, contra -indications, caution, 
instruction for handling and use of the cord blood unit including short -
term storage and preparation for transplantation. 
4. Procedure for transportation of cryopreserved cord blood Unit within 
the facility shall be designed to protect the integrity of the unit arid the 
health and safety of the personnel. 
5. Cryopreserved cord blood unit stored at -150°C or colder shall be 
transported in a liquid nitrogen cooled dry shipper t hat contains adequate 
absorbed liquid nitrogen and has been validated to maintain temperature 
below-150°C for at least 48 hours beyond the expected time of arrival at 
the receiving facility.] 

1084[PART XIII] 
GENERAL 

1. For the purposes of this Schedule, any test or method of testing 
described in the 1085[Indian Pharmacopoeia] shall be deemed to be a method 
approved by the licensing authority. 
2. The licensing authority shall publish in the Offi cial Gazette from time 
to time particulars of any test or method of testing approved by him. 
1086 [SCHEDULE F(I) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
PART I 
VACCINES 

(A) PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE PRODUCTION OF BACTERIAL 
VACCINES 
1. Definition—(1) This part of the Schedule applies to bacterial vaccines 
made from any micro -organism pathogenic to man or other animal and to 
vaccines made from other micro -organism pathogenic to man or other animal 
and to vaccines made from other micro-organisms which have antigenic value. 
(2) For the purposes of this part of the Schedule, a bacterial vaccine means 
a sterile suspension of a killed culture of the micro -organism from which the 
vaccine derives its name or sterile extract or derivative of a micro -organism, or 
a pure suspension of living micro -organisms which have been previously made 
aviruient. 
2. Staff of Establishment —A competent expert in bacteriology with 
sufficient experience in the manufacture and standardisation of biological 
products shall be in charge of the establishment responsible for the production 
of bacterial vaccine and he shall be assisted by a staff adequate for carrying out 
the tests required during the preparation and standardisation of the vaccines. 
3. Proper Name—The proper name of the vaccine shall be the name of 
the microorganism from which it is made followed by the word "Vaccine" 
unless this Schedule otherwise provides or if there is no other special provision 
in this Schedule, some other name as approved by the licensing authority: 
Provided that in the case of the under -mentioned preparations the proper 
name of the vaccine may be as follows:— 
1. Anthrax Spore Vaccine (Living). 
2. Blackquarter Vaccine. 
3. Enterotoxaemia Vaccine. 
4. Fowl Cholera Vaccine. 
5. Haemorrhagic Septicaemia Adjuvant Vaccine. 
6. Haemorrhagic Septicaemia Vaccine (Broth). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1087[7. Multi Component Clostridial Vaccine. 
8. Haemorrhagic Septicaemia Vaccine—Alum treated.] 
4. Records—Cultures used in the preparation of vaccine bef ore being 
manipulated into a vaccine, should be thoroughly tested for identity by the 
generally accepted tests applicable to the particular micro-organisms. 
The permanent records which the licensee is required to keep shall include 
amongst others, a record of the origin, properties and characteristics of the 
cultures. 
5. Combined Vaccines —Vaccines may be issued either singly or 
combined in any proportion in the same container. In the case of combination of 
vaccines, a name for the combined vaccine may be submitted by the licensee to 
the licensing authority, and if approved, may be used as the proper name of the 
vaccine. 
6. Preparation—Bacterial vaccines, simple or polyvalent, are prepared 
from selected cultures after careful examination for their ident ity', specificity, 
purity and antigenicity. They may be prepared in the following manner:— 
 (a) Formal Cultures or Bacterins. —The selected pure culture stain or 
strain are grown in a suitable fluid medium, at an optimum temperature, for 
an appropriate p eriod. The pure growth is then exposed to the action of 
solution of Formaldehyde I.P. in suitable concentration and temperature. 
The product is finally filled in suitable sterilised containers which are 
subsequently sealed. 
(b) Vaccine of Bacterial Prod ucts or Bacterial Derivatives —These 
vaccines are prepared by growing the organisms on suitable media and then 
deriving specific antigenic constituents of the bacteria by various special 
methods. 
(c) Living Bacterial Vaccines —They are prepared from non -pathogenic 
but fully immunogenic strains of micro-organism. Strict aseptic precautions 
are taken throughout the preparation against the introduction of microbial 
contaminants. 
7. General Standards— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) Description—Bacterial vaccines are colourless to yellowish brown 
liquids containing dead or viable bacteria in homogeneous suspension. 
(b) Identification—All types of vaccines confer active immunity in the 
susceptible animals which can be demonstrated by injecting suitable 
experimental animals with th e calculated doses of the product and 
subsequently determining the presence of the protective antibodies in 
their serum and/or by challenging the vaccinated animals by injecting 
virulent strain of the homologous organisms. The protected animals 
should survive the challenge. 
(c) Tests for Sterility—All bacterial vaccines shall be tested for sterility 
in accordance with the provision of Rules 115 to 119 (both inclusive). If 
the vaccine contains added bactericide or bacteriostatic, a quantity of 
medium sufficient to render the growth inhibitor ineffective is added to 
the sample, or a suitable substance is added to the sample, or a suitable 
substance is added in a concentration sufficient to render the growth 
inhibitor ineffective but not itself to inhibit th e growth of micro -
organism. 
(d) Purity Tests for Living Bacterial Vaccine —Petri-dishes containing 
suitable media are streaked with the final product and incubated at 37°C 
for 72 hours. The vaccine passes the test if no growth of micro -organisms 
other than those from which the vaccine was prepared is observed. Other 
tests include examination for motility of the organisms, fermentation 
reactions and thermoagglutination test and dye -inhibitor test in case of 
bruceliza vaccine. 
(e) Safety Test—The safety of the vaccine shall be assessed by injecting 
it in appropriate dose in suitable susceptible animals. No animal should 
show any untoward, general or local reaction, within seven days after 
inoculation. 
(f) Potency Test —Wherever applicable, susceptible e xperimental 
animals are inoculated with the calculated doses of the final product. The 
animals are challenged, after the period of immunisation, with virulent 
infective dose of the homologous culture along with the controls. The 
potency of the vaccine is a ssessed by the survival of the vaccinated 
animals and the death of the controls. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
8. Labelling— 
(a) The label on the ampoule or the bottle shall indicate: 
(i) Proper name. 
(ii) Contents in millilitres or doses. 
(iii) Potency, if any. 
(iv) Batch number, 
(v) Expiry date. 
(b) The label on the outside container shall indicate: 
(i) Proper name. 
(ii) Contents in millilitres or doses. 
(iii) Batch number. 
(iv) Date of manufacture. 
(v) Manufacturing licence No. 
(vi) Manufacturer's name and address. 
(vii) "For animal treatment only''. 
(viii) Storage conditions. 
9. Storage—Bacterial vaccines shall be stored, protected from light at 
temperature between 2°C to 4°C and shall not be frozen. 
10. Date of Manufacture —The date of manu facture shall be, unless 
otherwise specified in the individual monograph in this Part, as defined in 
clause (b) of sub-rule (3) of Rule 109. 
ANTHRAX SPORE VACCINE (LIVING) 
1. Synonyms—A virulent Anthrax Spore Vaccine or Bacillus Anthracis 
Vaccine (Living). 
2. Definition—The vaccine is a suspension of living spores of an 
uncapsulated avirulent strain of B. anthracis in 50 per cent glycerine saline. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. Preparation—Avirulent B. anthracis of known antigenicity is grown on 
suitable medium at pH 7.4 in R oux flasks. After 72 hours incubation at 37°C, 
the pure sporulated culture growth which shows 70 to 80 per cent sporulation is 
washed with normal saline and glycerinated to the extent of 50 per cent by 
weight of the culture washing and the whole suspension is kept at room 
temperature for twenty-one days to allow for the stabilization of the spores. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—It is slightly opalescent or pale brown semi -viscous 
liquid. 
(b) Identification—Uncapsulated B. anthracis which is avirule nt can be 
isolated from the vaccine. 
(c) Sterility Test—Should comply with the test for sterility described in 
the general monograph on "Bacterial Vaccine". 
(d) Purity Test—Complies with the "Purity Tests for Living Bacterial 
Vaccine" described under the general monograph on "Bacterial Vaccine". 
(e) Safety Test—Four healthy adult guinea-pigs each weighing 300-450 
g. not previously treated with any material which will interfere with the 
test are inoculated subcutaneously, two with 0.2 ml. each and t wo with 
0.5 ml. each of the unglycerinated suspension respectively. Four more 
guinea pigs are injected with 1:5 dilution of the glycerinated product in 
the same manner. Not untoward reaction should be observed and none of 
the animals should die of anthrax during the period of observation for 
seven days. 
(f) Safety and Potency Test in Sheep and Goat —Spore count of the 
glycerinated suspension is made after twenty -one days from the date of 
glycerination. Three plates for each of the three dilutions 10 -5, 10 -6, and 
10-7, are made. 
Eight sheeps and eight goats each weighing not less than 18 kg. are 
injected subcutaneously in the following manner:— 
two sheep: Each subcutaneously with 10 ml. of the stock suspension (for 
safety). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
two goats: Each subcutaneously wi th 5 ml. of the stock suspension (for 
safety). 
six sheep: Each subcutaneously with one million spores suspended in 50 
per cent glycerine saline solution. 
six goats: Each subcutaneously with one million spores suspended in 50 
per cent glycerine saline solution. 
None of these animals should die of anthrax. Twenty -one days after 
vaccination, the animals are challenged with 100 lethal doses of virulent 
B. Anthracis spores along with two healthy sheep and two goats as 
controls. 
All the controls should die of ant hrax within 72 hours after challenge 
and at least 66 per cent of the vaccinated animals should survive. The 
animals shall be observed for a minimum of ten days from the date of 
challenge. 
1088[(g) Viable Count—The vaccine when plated on suitable media should 
show 10 million viable spores per cattle dose and 5 million spores per 
sheep dose.] 
5. Labelling and Storage —Should comply with the requirements for 
"Labelling" and "Storage" as laid down in the general monograph on "Bacteria l 
Vaccines". 
1089[6. Expiry Date—The date of expiry of the potency of the vaccine shall be 
more than two years from the date of manufacture is stored in 4°C and six 
months, if stored at room temperature.] 
BLACKQUARTER VACCINE 
1. Synonym—Blackleg Vaccine or Quarter Evil Vaccine. 
2. Definition—Blackquarter Vaccine is a culture of Clostridium chauvoei 
grown in a suitable anaerobic fluid medium and rendered sterile and toxic by 
the addition of Solution of Formaldehyde I.P. in s uch a manner that it retains it 
immunising properties. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. Preparation—Cultures of Cl. chauvoei are grown in a suitable 
anaerobic fluid medium and killed by the addition of a suitable concentration of 
solution of Formaldehyde I.P. The final product shall be adjusted to pH. 7.0 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—It is a yellowish brown liquid containing dead bacteria 
in suspension. 
(b) Identification—It protects susceptible animals against infection with 
Cl. chauvoei. 
(c) Sterility Test—Should comply with the test for sterility described in 
the general monograph on "Bacterial Vaccine". 
(d) Safety and Potency Test —At least six adult healthy guinea -pigs 
each weighing 300g. to 450 g. are injected subcutaneously each with 3 
ml. of the product followed a week later by a second injection with the 
same dose. They should not show any systemic reaction but may show 
only a minimum of local reaction. Fourteen days after the second 
injection six of the vaccinated guinea-pigs are challenged intramuscularly 
with 25 viable spores of Cl. Chauvoei equivalent to 5. c.h.d. along with 
0.2 ml. of a 5 per cent solution of calcium chloride. Two controls are 
used. The controls should die of the specific injection and at least 4 of the 
six vaccinated animals should survive before the product is passed for 
issue. 
5. Labelling and Storage —Should comply with the requirements of 
"Labelling" and "Storage" as laid down in the general monograph on "Bacterial 
Vaccine". 
6. Expiry Date.—The date of expiry of the potency of the vaccine shall not 
be more than twenty-four months from the date of manufacture. 
BRUCELLA ABORTUS (STRAIN 19 VACCINE) (LIVING) 
1. Synonym—Contagious Abortion Vaccine (Strain 19) (Living). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. Definition—Brucella Abortus (Strain 19) Vaccine (Living) is a 
suspension of a pure smooth living culture of Br. abortus of low virulence in 
normal saline solution. 
3. Preparation—Forty-eight to seventy -two-hour-old growth of Br. 
abortus (Strain 19) on potato agar medium in Roux flasks washed with buffered 
normal saline solution pH 6.4 and the pure growth from the flasks are pooled 
together, 0.5 ml. of the pooled product is mixed with 4.5 ml. of normal saline 
solution at pH 6.4 in graduated centrifuge tube and centrifuged at 3000 r.p.m. 
for one hour. The percentage of c ell deposit is assessed by reading the amount 
of cell deposit obtained. 
The concentrated suspension is then diluted with buffer normal saline 
solution so that the final product contains 0.7 per cent bacterial cell deposit. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—It is an almost white turbid liquid containing live 
bacteria in suspension. 
(b) Identification—It consists of Gram -negative bacilli capable of 
protecting susceptible animals against Brucellosis. 
(c) Sterility Test—Should comply with the test for s terility described in 
the general monograph on "Bacterial Vaccine" 
(d) Purity Test —A smear of the finished products examined 
microscopically after staining by Gram's method for evidence of any 
contamination. When grow n on suitable media, Br. abortus should be 
obtained in a pure state. 
(e) Safety Test—Two healthy guinea-pigs each weighing 300 g. to 450 
g. are inoculated subcutaneously each with 1.0 ml. of the final product. 
The guinea -pigs should not show excessive reaction of a toxic nature 
during the period of observation of ten days. 
(f) Potency Test—Each of a group of four healthy guinea -pigs, drawn 
from a uniform stock and each weighing 300 g. to 450 g. is injected 
intramuscularly with 1 ml. of the vaccine, and is challenged nine weeks 
after vaccination by the intramuscular injection of 1 ml. of a suspension 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
containing 5,000 fully virulent Br. abortus organisms. Each of a group of 
two unvaccinated guinea -pigs is similarly injected. After a further six 
weeks, the guinea -pigs are killed and cultur es are made from their 
spleens. More than half of the vaccinated guinea -pigs contain no 
demonstrable Br. abortus in the spleen; all the controls are infected. 
(g) Viable Count—The vaccine when plated on suitable media should 
show between 14,000 million and 18,000 million Br. abortus organisms 
per ml. At least 80 per cent of the brucella organisms should be in the 
smooth phase. 
5. Labelling and Storage —Should comply with the requirements of 
"Labelling" and "Storage" as laid down in the general monograp h on "Bacterial 
Vaccine". The liquid vaccine shall be issued fresh as far as possible without 
allowing any period of storage after manufacture. 
6. Expiry Date—The date of expiry of the vaccine shall be not more than 
five weeks from the date of manufacture. 
ENTEROTOXAEMIA VACCINE 
1. Synonyms—Clostridium Welchii, Type D, Formal Culture : Pulpy 
Kidney Vaccine. 
2. Definition—Enterotoxaemia Vaccine is a culture of a highly toxigenic 
strain of Clostridium type D, grown in an anaerobic medium rendered ste rile 
and toxic by the addition of Solution of Formaldehyde I.P. in such a manner that 
it retains its immunising properties. 
3. Preparation—Selected toxigenic strain of Cl. Welchii type D, is grown 
in a liquid medium under conditions which ensure maximum epsilon toxin 
production. The culture is checked for purity and toxicity as tested in mice. 
Solution of Formaldehyde I.P. is added in suitable concentration and the 
formolised culture is kept at 37°C till the production is sterile and non-toxic. 
4. Standard— 
(a) Description—It is a yellowish brown liquid containing dead bacteria 
in suspension. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) Identification—When injected into susceptible animals it stimulates 
the production of epsilon antitoxin of Cl. Welchii, type D. 
(c) Sterility Test—Complies with the test for sterility described in the 
general monograph on 'Bacterial Vaccine'. 
(d) Safety and Potency Tests —At least eight sheep each weighing not 
less than 18 kg. or twelve rabbits each weighing 1 kg. to 1.5 kg. are used 
for testing the safety and potency of each brew of the vaccine. Two sheep 
receive subcutaneously 10 ml. each and the other six sheep receive 2.5 
ml. each of the product subcutaneously. The rabbits are given 
subcutaneously a dose of 5 ml. each. The sheep and rabbits are ob served 
for five days. They should show only a minimum local reaction and no 
systemic reaction. 
The sheep receiving 10 ml. are withdrawn from experiments after five 
days. Each of the other six sheep is inoculated with a second dose of 2.5 
ml. fourteen days after the first injection. The rabbits are inoculated with 
5 ml. as a second dose, after one month of the first inoculation. The day 
after the second inoculation the sera of sheep or rabbits are pooled 
separately. The pooled serum of each group of animal s hall contain in 
each ml. not less than two international units of Cl welchii epsilon 
antitoxin which is determined by testing on mice as follows:— 
One ml. of the pooled serum is mixed with one ml. of the epsilon toxin of 
Cl. welchii type D, containing 300 mouse-minimum-lethal-doses (mouse 
m.l.d.) and kept at room temperature for half an hour. At least two mice 
each weighing not less than 18 g. are each given intravenously 0.2 ml. of 
the mixture. As control two mice each weighing not less than 18 g. 
should each receive 0.2 ml. of the toxin containing 300 mouse m.l.d. per 
ml. diluted with equal volume of normal saline. The control mice should 
die within 1 to 2 hours while the mice receiving the mixture of serum and 
toxin should survive for at least two days. S era containing one 
International Unit of epsilon antitoxin per ml. will be able to neutralise 
150 mouse m.l.d epsilon toxin of Cl. welchii type D. 
5. Labelling and Storage —Should comply with the requirements 
regarding "Lebelling" and "Storage" as laid d own in the general monograph on 
"Bacterial Vaccines". 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6. Expiry Date—The expiry date of potency of the vaccine shall not more 
than twelve months from the date of manufacture. 
FOWL CHOLERA VACCINE (POLYVALENT) 
1. Synonym—Pasteurella Septica Vaccine (Avian). 
2. Definition—Fowl Cholera Vaccine is a formolised pure broth culture of 
virulent strains of Pasteurella Septica (Avian). 
3. Preparation.—The strains are grown separately in nutrient broth for 48 
hours at 37°C. The pure growth is killed by the addition of a Solution of 
Formaldehyde I.P. in a suitable concentration. The cultures are then mixed in 
equal proportions and the final vaccine is bottled in suitable containers. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—It is a light yellow liquid containing d ead bacteria 
in suspension. 
(b) Identification—It protects susceptible birds against P. aviseptica 
infection. 
(c) Sterility Test—Complies with the test for "Sterility" described under 
the general monograph on "Bacterial Vaccine". 
(d) Safety Test—Two healthy young fowls each weighing not less than 
400 g. or twelve healthy mice are inoculated subcutaneously each with 1 
ml. of the final product. The birds should not show any untoward reaction 
during the period of observation for seven days. 
5. Labelling and Storage —Should comply with the requirements of 
"Labelling" and "Storage" as laid down in the general monograph on "Bacterial 
Vaccine". 
6. Expiry Date—The date of expiry of potency of the vaccine shall be not 
more than six months from the date of manufacture. 
HAEMORRHAGIC SEPTICAEMIA ADJUVANT VACCINE 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1. Synonym—Pasteurella Septica Adjuvant Vaccine. 
2. Definition—The vaccine is a homogeneous suspension of formolised 
agar-washed Pasteurella septica with liquid paraffin and lanolin. 
3. Preparation—Pure growth of a highly antigenic strain of P. Septica in 
phase 1 grown on nutrient agar medium containing 0.5 per cent yeast extract is 
washed with 0.5 per cent formal saline. The pooled suspension is diluted with 
normal saline to contain approxi mately 2,100 million P. Septica organisms per 
ml. The safety test of this adjusted suspension is conducted on four white mice 
each weighing not less than 18 g. and observed for three days before it is mixed 
with liquid paraffin and lanolin in suitable proportion. 
The mixture is blended until a homogeneous emulsion is obtained which is 
filled in suitable containers. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—It is a white thick oily liquid containing dead bacteria 
in suspension. 
(b) Identification—It protects susceptible animals against infection with 
P. Septica. 
(c) Sterility Test—It complies with the test for "Sterility" described in 
the general monograph on "Bacterial Vaccine". 
(d) Safety Test—Six white mice each weighing not less than 18 g. are 
inoculated intraperitoneally each with 0.5 ml. of the vaccine. None of the 
mice should die of pasteurellosis during the observation period for seven 
days. 
(e) Potency Test.—Three susceptible calves in good condition between 
the ages of nine months to three year s are injected intramuscularly, each 
with 2 ml. of the vaccine, in the case of animals weighing up to 140 kg. 
and 3 ml. for heavier ones. 
Three weeks later these animals along with two healthy animals of 
the same type and species are challenged subcutaneou sly with 18 hours 
old broth culture of P. Septica equivalent to at least 50 million mouse 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
minimum infective dose. Both the controls should die of pasteurellosis 
and at least two out of the three protected animals should survive the 
challenge dose for a period of seven days. 
5. Labelling and Storage —Should comply with the requirements for 
"Labelling" and "Storage" as laid down in the general monograph on "Bacterial 
Vaccine". 
6. Expiry Date —The date of expiry of potency of the vaccine shall be not 
more than twelve months from the date of manufacture. 
HAEMORRHAGIC SEPTICAEMIA VACCINE (BROTH) 
1. Synonym—Pasteurella Septica Vaccine (Broth). 
2. Definition—Haemorrhagic Septicaemia Vaccine is formolised culture 
of a virulent strain of Pasteurella septica in nutrient broth. 
3. Preparation—P. Septica culture is grown in nutrient broth at 37°C. 
The pure growth is killed by the addition of a solution of Formaldehyde I.P. in a 
suitable concentration. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—It is a pale yellow liqu id containing dead bacteria in 
suspension. 
(b) Identification—It protects susceptible animals against infection with 
P. Septica. 
(c) Sterility Test—Complies with the test for "Sterility" described under 
the general monograph on "Bacterial Vaccine". 
(d) Safety Test—Four healthy rabbits each weighing 1 kg. to 1.5 kg. are 
inoculated subcutaneously each with 5 ml. of the product. There should 
be no untoward reaction during the period of observation for seven days'. 
Alternately two rabbits and six mice may be employed. The dose for mice 
will be 0.5 ml. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
5. Labelling and Storage —Should comply with the requirements for 
"Labelling" and "Storage" as laid down in the general monograph on "Bacterial 
Vaccine". 
6. Expiry Date—The date of expiry' of potency of the vaccine shall be not 
more than six months from the date of manufacture. 
SALMONELLA ABORTUS EQUI VACCINE 
1. Synonym—Equine Abortion Vaccine. 
2. Definition—Equine Abortion Vaccine is a mixture of equal parts of 
pure formolised cultures of smooth laboratory strains of Salmonella abortus 
equi. 
3. Preparation—The strains are grown separately on plain agar in Roux 
flasks, for 24 -28 hours at 37°C. The pure growth is washed with normal saline 
solution and the washings are pooled together. The suspension is standardised to 
contain approximately 600 million Sal abortus equi organisams per ml. using 
normal saline solution as diluent. The culture is killed by the addition of 
sufficient quantity of solution of Formaldehyde I.P. in a suitable concentration 
and the product is kept at 37°C for seven days. Potassium alum is added to give 
a final concentration of 1 per cent. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—It is an opalescent liquid containing dead bacteria in 
suspension. 
(b) Identification—It protects susceptible animals against infection with 
Sal. abortus equi. 
(c) Sterility Test—Complies with the tests for sterility described in the 
general monograph on "Bacterial Vaccines". 
(d) Safety Test—Six white mice each weighing not less than 18 g. are 
inoculated intraperitoneally each with 0.5 ml. of the product. None of the 
mice should die of salmonellosis. The mice are observed for ninety-six 
hours. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
5. Labelling and Storage —Should comply with the requirements for 
"Labelling" and "Storage" as lai d down in the general monograph on 
"Bacterial Vaccine". 
6. Expiry Date—The date of expiry of potency of the vaccine shall be not 
 more than six months from the date of manufacture. 
STREPTOCOCCUS EQUI VACCINE 
1. Synonym—Strangles Vaccine 
2. Definition—Streptococcus equi Vaccine is a phenolised culture of a 
number of different isolates of Streptococcus equi in glucose serum broth. 
3. Preparation—Equal proportions of forty -eight hours old pure cultures of 
different isolates of Str. equi in ser um glucose broth are mixed together. The 
suspension is centrifuged and the deposit is washed with normal saline solution 
after removing the supernatant. The washed cells are suspended in normal saline 
and heated in a water bath at 65°C for two hours. Pheno l and normal saline are 
added to give a final concentration of 1,200 million Str. equi organisms per mo. 
and 0.5 per cent of phenol in the vaccine. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—It is slightly opalescent liquid containing dead 
bacteria in suspension. 
(b) Identification—It protects susceptible animals against infection with 
Str. equi. 
(c) Sterility Test—Complies with the test for "Sterility" described in the 
general monograph on "Bacterial Vaccine". The nutrient broth being 
replaced by glucose broth. 
(d) Safety Test —Two ponies and two rabbits each weighing not less 
than 1 kg. are inoculated each with 10 ml and 2 ml. respectively of the 
final product. The animals should not show any untoward reaction during 
the period of observation of seven days. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
5. Labelling and Storage —Should comply with the requirements for 
"Labelling" and "Storage" as laid down in the general monograph on "Bacterial 
Vaccine". 
6. Expiry Date—The date of expiry of potency of the vaccine shall be not 
more than six months from the date of manufacture. 
OLD ADJUVANT VACCINE AGAINST PASTEURELLOSIS IN SHEEP 
AND GOATS 
1. Synonym—Pasteurella Septica Adjuvant Vaccine for Ovines and 
Caprines. 
2. Definition—The vaccine is a homogeneous suspension of formolised 
agarwashed Pasteurella septica of ovine origin with liquid paraffin and 
lanolin. 
3. Preparation—Pure growth of highly antigenic strains (Rl, R2, R4) in 
phase I grown separately on nutrient agar medium containing 0.5 per cent 
yeast extract is washed with 0.5 per cent No rmal saline. Equal quantities of 
the suspension of three strains diluted with Normal saline to contain 
approximately 2100 million organisms per ml. is pooled together. The safety 
test of this adjusted pooled suspension is conducted on four white mice each 
weighing not less than 18 g. and observed for three days before it is mixed 
with liquid paraffin and lanolin in suitable proportion. 
The mixture is blended until a homogeneous emulsion is obtained which 
is filled in suitable containers. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—It is a white thick oily liquid containing dead bacteria 
in suspension. 
(b) Identification—It protects susceptible animals against infection with 
P. Septica. 
(c) Sterility Test—Complies with the test for "Sterility" described in the 
general monograph on "Bacterial Vaccines". 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(d) Safety Test—Six white mice each weighing not less than 18 g. are 
innoculated intraperitoneally each with 0.5 ml. of the vaccine. None of 
the mice should die of Pasteurellosis during the observation period o f 
seven days. 
The vaccine is also inoculated into six sheep and six goats in a dose of 3 
ml. each intramuscularly and are observed for a period of seven days. 
During this period none should die of Pasteurellosis. 
(e) Potency Test—Not being done at present. 
5. Labelling and Storage —Should comply with the requirements 
regarding "Labelling" and "Storage" as laid down in the general monograph on 
"Bacterial Vaccine". 
6. Expiry Date—The date of expiry of Potency of the Vaccine shall be 
not more than twelve months from the date of manufacture. 
1090[MULTICOMPONENT CLOSTRIDIAL VACCINE 
1. Synonyms—Combined anaculture of Clostridium perfringens type C 
and D, Cl. septicum and Cl. Oedematiens. 
2. Definition—It consists of four high ly antigenic components containing 
the toxoids of Cl. perfringens type D, Cl. perfringens type C. Cl. Oedematiens 
and Cl. septicum which are prepared in double strength and then combined in 
such a proportion that would invoke adequate anti -toxin response i n the 
vaccinated sheep against each antigen incorporated in the vaccine. 
3. Preparation—The above strains are grown separately in suitable liquid 
media under conditions which ensure maximum toxin production. The cultures 
are checked for purity and toxic ity in mice. Solution of formaldehyde I.P., of 
analytical grade is added to a 0.5 per cent final concentration and formalised 
cultures are kept at 37°C till the product is sterilised and atoxic. The formalised 
anacultures are pooled, precipitated by the ad dition of Aluminium Chloride, 20 
per cent solution in distilled water to have a final concentration of the chemical 
to 10 per cent and pH adjusted to 6.0. The sedimer.ted toxoid is reconstituted to 
half the original volume in normal saline. 
4. Standards— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) Description—It is a whitish liquid when shaken thoroughly to 
contain killed bacteria and toxoid in suspension. 
(b) Identification—When injected into susceptible animals it 
stimulates the production of epsilon and beta antitoxins against C . 
perfringens type D and C and also antitoxins against Cl. septicum and 
toxin of Cl. oedematiens. 
(c) Sterility test —Complies with the test of sterility described in 
 general monograph on "Bacterial Vaccines." 
(d) Safety test—Four sheeps each are inoculated with 10 ml. S/C of the 
product and these are observed for 7 days during which period the 
animals shall not show any local or systemic reaction. 
(e) Potency test —Eight sheep each are inoculated with 2 doses of 
vaccine S/C at an interval o f 21 days and bled on 10th day after 2nd 
inoculation for collection of serum for assessing the antitoxin titre against 
each antigen incorporated in the vaccine. The post inoculation serum 
should contain not less than 2-.i.u. of epsilon and beta antit oxins of Cl. 
perfringens and 2. 5. i.u. of Cl. Septicum antitoxin and 4 i.u. of Cl. 
oedematiens antitoxin. 
5. Labelling and Storage—Shall comply with the requirements regarding 
labelling and storage as laid down in the general monograph on "Bacterial 
Vaccines." 
6. Expiry Date—The expiry date of potency of vaccine shall not be more 
than 6 months from the date of manufacture. 
HEMORRHAGIC SEPTICAEMIA VACCINE—ALUM TREATED 
1. Synonyms—Pasteurella multocida/ (Yersinia Multocida) vaccine —
Alum treated. 
2. Definition—The vaccine is a formalised culture of a virulent strain of 
Pasteurella multocida in nutrient both treated with potash alum. 
3. Preparation—A highly potent strain of Pasteurella multocida type I in 
Phase I is grown on nutrient broth at 37°C . The pure growth is killed by the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
addition of a solution of Formalin I.P. in suitable concentration (0.5 per cent). 
This is treated with potassium alum I.P. to give a final concentration of 1 per 
cent. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—It is a white sus pension containing dead bacteria and 
alum. 
(b) Identification—It protects susceptible animals against infection with 
P. Multocida. 
(c) Sterility test —Complies with the test for sterility described under 
the general monograph on "Bacterial Vaccines". 
(d) Safety test —Four healthy rabbits each weighing 1 to 1.5 kg. are 
inoculated subcutaneously each with 5 ml. of the product. There shall be 
no untoward reaction during the period of observation for day except 
slight local swelling. Alternatively two ra bbits and six mice may be 
employed. The dose for mice will be 0.5 ml. 
5. Labelling and Storage —Shall comply with the requirements of 
labelling and storage as laid down in the general monograph on "Bacterial 
Vaccines". 
6. Expiry Date—The date of expiry of potency of the vaccine shall be not 
more than six months from the date of manufacture.] 
(B) PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE PRODUCTION OF VIRAL 
VACCINES 
1. Definition— (i) This part of the Schedule applies to viral vaccines live 
or inactivated made from any virus pathogenic to domestic animals and poultry 
and made from other modified viruses which have any antigenic value. 
(ii) For the purpose of this part of the Schedule, a virus vaccine means a 
sterile suspension or a freeze dried powder containing t he modified living or 
inactivated virus particles, which in its original unaltered stage, causes disease 
from which the vaccine derives its name and which has been prepared from the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
blood or tissues of a suitable host in which it has been grown in vivo or from 
tissue culture. 
2. Staff of Establishment—The establishment in which viral vaccines are 
prepared, must be under the direction and control of an expert in a bacteriology 
with specialised training in virology and sufficient experience in the producti on 
of viral vaccines, and he shall be assisted by a staff adequate for carrying out the 
tests required during the preparation and standardisation of the vaccines. 
3. Proper Name—The proper name of any viral vaccine shall be the name 
of the disease which is caused by the particular virus from which the vaccine is 
produced followed by the word "Vaccine" unless the Schedule otherwise 
provides, if there is not special provision in the Schedule, such other name as is 
approved by the Licensing Authority. Provi ded that in the case of the 
undermentioned preparation the proper name of the vaccine shall be as 
follows:— 
(i) Fowl Pox Vaccines, Chick Embryo Virus (Living) 
(ii) Fowl Pox Vaccine, Pigeon Pox Virus (Living) 
(iii) Horse Sickness Vaccine (Living) 
(iv) Ranikhet Disease Vaccine (Living) 
(v) Ranikhet Disease Vaccine F Strain (Living) 
(vi) Rinderpest Goat Adapted Tissue Vaccine (Living) 
(vii) Rinderpest Lapinised Vaccine (Living) 
(viii) Rinderpest Lapinised Avianised Vaccine (Living) 
(ix) Sheep and Goat Pox Vaccine (Living) 
(x) Swine Fever Vaccine (Crystal violet) 
(xi) Swine Fever Vaccine Lapinised (Living) 
1091[(xii) Foot and Mouth Disease Vaccine (Inactivated); 
(xiii) Canine Hepatitis Vaccine (Living).] 

1092[4. Records —The seed virus used in the preparation of vaccine shall, 
before being used for preparing a batch, be thoroughly tested for purity, safety, 
sterility and antigenicity by the generally accepted tests applicable to a 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
particular virus. It shall not be more than five passages away from the stock 
seed virus, unless otherwise prescribed for a particular virus. The stock seed 
virus shall be maintained by seed —lot system at specified passage level and 
tested for bacter ial, mycoplasmal and extraneous viral contamination. The 
permanent record which the licencee is required to keep shall include a record 
of the origin, properties and characteristics of the seed virus from which the 
vaccines are made.] 
5. Tests—Viral vaccine shall be tested for sterility, safety and potency on 
suitable test animals and for viability in the case of live vaccines. 
(a) Sterility Test—All Vaccines shall be tested for sterility in accordance 
with Rules 115 to 119. If the vaccine contains ad ded bactericides or 
bacteriostatic, a quantity of a medium sufficient to render the growth 
inhibitor ineffective is added to the sample or a suitable substance is added 
in a concentration sufficient to render the growth inhibitor ineffective but 
not itself to inhibit the growth of micro-organisms. 
(b) Safety test—Suitable laboratory animals or large animals or birds may 
be employed to test the vaccine for safety. Details of safety test are given in 
the individual monograph. 
(c) Potency test —All virus vaccines for which potency test has been 
prescribed shall be tested for potency and only those which pass the potency 
test shall be issued. Details of the potency test are given in the individual 
monograph. 
6. Storage—Live viral vaccines shall be stored , protected from light at 
sub-zero temperature as required. Other viral vaccines shall be stored at 2°C to 
4°C but shall not be frozen. 
7. Condition of housing of animals —(i) The animals used in the 
production of vaccine must be housed in hygienic condi tions in premises 
satisfactory for this purpose. 
(ii) Only healthy animals may be used in the production of vaccine. Each 
animal intended to be used as a source of vaccine must, before being passed for 
the production of vaccine be subjected to a period of observation in quarantine 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
for at least seven days. During the period of quarantine the animal must remain 
free from any sign of disease and must be well kept. 
1093[(iii) The poultry birds from which eggs and cell culture for production of 
vaccines are obtained should be housed in a manner so as to keep them free 
from extraneous infection and shall be screened at frequent intervals for 
common bacterial, mycoplasmal and viral injection. The record of the tests and 
their results shall be maintained by the manufacturers. ] 
8. Lebelling—The provisions of "Labelling" as laid down for Bacterial 
Vaccines shall also apply to Viral Vaccine. The following additional 
information shall be included on the label of the outside container. 
(i) The name and percentage of bacteriostatic agent contained in the 
vaccine. 
(ii) If the vaccine as used for sale contains any substance other than the 
diluent, the nature and strength of such substance. 
9. Date of Manufacture—For the purpose of this part of the Schedule, the 
date of manufacture shall be what is given unless otherwise stated in the 
individual monograph, as defined in sub-clause (b) of sub-rule (3) of Rule 109. 
FOWL POX VACCINE CHICK EMBRYO VIRUS (LIVING) 
1. Synonym—Egg adapted Fowl Pox Vaccine (Living). 
2. Definition—Fowl-pox vaccine, Chick -Embryo Virus (Living) is a 
suspension of a modified living virus e.g.,, Mukteswar Strain prepared from the 
chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) of the infected embryo and is either freeze 
dried or is issued as glycerinated liquid vaccine. 
3. Preparation—Active chick -embryos obtained form Salmonella 
pullorum free flock, are used. 1094[Twelve to thirteen days old embryos are 
injected with a suitable dilution of the suspension of the infected members (seed 
virus) of chick embryo adopted fowl pox virus.] The suspension of the stock 
seed virus is dropped on the CAM. After an incubation at 37°C for a suitable 
period membranes showing discrete or confluent lesions (pocks) are h arvested. 
These are homogenised with adequate quantity of antibiotics (penicillin and 
streptomycin) ampouled in 0.5 ml. quantities and freeze dried. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—Light mauve coloured scales. 
(b) Identification—When reconstituted v accine is applied to scarified 
area of the skin of a fowl it produced characteristic lesions of fowl pox. 
This product should afford protection against fowl pox. 
(c) Moisture Content—Moisture content in the finished product should 
not exceed 1.0 per cent. 
(d) Safety Test —For testing each batch of fowl pox vaccine twelve 
healthy cockerels, or other suitable young chicken each weighing not less 
than 400 g. from the same source are taken. This group of twelve birds is 
immunized at least twenty -one days p ervious to the test, with fowl pox 
vaccine. The vaccine under test is reconstituted in 5 ml. of 50 per cent 
glycerine saline and administered to fowls as follows:— 
Three of the test birds are injected subcutaneously with 0.8 ml. or 
10 times the field doses of the vaccine under test. This group serves to 
indicate whether the product is free from other viruses and bacteria 
causing septicaemia or not. Three of the test birds are injected 
intratrecheally with 0.3 ml. or 10 times the field doses of the vaccine 
under test. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from 
the virus of infectious laryngotracheitis and similar diseases. 
Three of the test birds are injected intranasally with 0.2 ml. of the 
vaccine under test. This group serves to indicat e whether the product is 
free from the virus of Coryza and similar disease. 
The three remaining birds serve as controls. They are isolated and 
kept under observation for twenty -one days. The birds that succumb 
during the period of twenty -one days are subje cted to a careful post -
mortem examination. The product is withheld from issue until the vaccine 
and the test birds are shown to be free from the causative agents of any 
extraneous disease. 
(e) Sterility Test —Complies with the tests for sterility as desc ribed 
under the general monograph on "viral vaccines." 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(f) Potency Test—For testing of potency three unsusceptible birds each 
weighing not less than 400 g. are vaccinated using the field dose by the 
stick method and examined for "takes". Three weeks aft er vaccination 
these birds along with two unvaccinated controls are exposed to 
challenged virus and observed for fourteen days. The vaccinated birds 
should not manifest any reaction, while the controls should show active 
"takes". 
5. Labelling—Should comply with the requirement for "Labelling" as laid 
down in the general monograph on "Viral Vaccines". 
6. Storage and Expiry date —Freeze dried vaccine shall be expected to 
retain its potency for periods at temperatures as specified below:— 
—15°C to —20°C — Twenty-four months 
2°C to 4°C — Twelve months 
Room temperature—up to one month. 
The liquid vaccine shall be expected to retain its potency for periods and 
temperatures as specified below: 
2 °C to 4 °C — six months 
Room temperature— seven days 
FOWL POX VACCINE PIGEON POX VIRUS (LIVING) 
1. Synonym— Fowl Pox Vaccine (pigeon pox scab). 
2. Definition— Fowl Pox vaccine, pigeon pox virus (living) consists of 
pigeon pox virus in scabs collected from artificially infected pigeons and dried. 
3. Preparation—Healthy pigeons are scarified on the legs and breast, with a 
suitable dilution of the suspension of pigeon pox virus. The pigeons reacting 
satisfactorily and showing good takes are selected and the superficial skin layer 
scrapted by means of sharp scalpel. The material so collected is freed from 
feathers, homogenised and dried or freeze died. The dried pulp is powdered, 
sieved and ampouled in 0.3 g. quantities and sealed. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—Light cream coloured powder. 
(b) Identification—When applied to feather follicles by vigorous 
rubbing, it produces mild reaction in fowls. The product should afford 
protection to fowls up to six weeks against fowl pox. 
(c) Safety Test — For testing a batch of vaccine, twelve healthy 
cockerels, or other suitable young chicken from the same source are made 
available at the same time. This group of twelve birds is immunised at 
least twenty -one days previous to the test with fowl pox vaccine. The 
vaccine under test is reconstituted in 10 ml. of 50 per cen t glycerine 
saline and administered to fowls as follows:— 
Three of the test birds are injected subcutaneously with 0.3 ml. or 10 
times the field dose of the vaccine to be tested. This group serves to 
indicate whether the product is free from organisms of s epticaemia 
diseases. 
Three of the test birds are injected intranasally with 0.2 of the vaccine to 
be tested. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from 
virus of Coryza and similar diseases. 
1095[Three of the test birds are injected intrathicheally with 0.2 ml. of 10 
times of the field dose of the vaccine under test. This Group serves to 
indicate whether the product is free from the virus of infectious 
laryngotracheitis and similar diseases.] 
The three remainin g birds serve as controls. All the birds under test are 
isolated and held under observation for twenty -one days. All those that 
succumb are subjected to careful post -mortem examination. The product 
is withheld from issue until the vaccine and test birds are shown to be free 
from the causative agents of any extraneous diseases. 
(d) Sterility Test—Complies with the tests for sterility described under 
the general monograph on "Viral Vaccine". 
(e) Potency Test—For testing of potency of a batch of vaccines three 
susceptible birds each weighing not less than 400 g. are vaccinated using 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
the field dose by the follicular method and examined for "takes". Three 
weeks after vaccination these birds and two healthy susceptible controls 
are exposed to challenge virus and are observed for fourteen days. The 
vaccinated birds shall manifest no reaction, while the controls must have 
active "takes". 
5. Storage and Labelling —Should comply with the requirement of 
"Labelling" as laid down in the general monograph on "Viral Vaccines". 
6. Expiry date—The vaccine shall be expected to retain its potency for 
periods at temperatures as specified below: 
—15°C to —20°C — two years 
2°C to 4°C — twelve months 
Room temperature—up to one month. 
FOWL POX VACCINE-PIGEON POX-CHICK EMBRYOS VIRUS 
(LIVING) 
1. Synonym—Chick embryo adapted pigeon pox vaccine (Living) 
2. Definition—Fowl pox vaccine (Pigeon Pox Virus) chick embryo adopted 
virus (Living) is a suspension of a modified living virus prepared from the 
chorioallantoic membranes of the infected embryos and is freeze dried. 
3. Preparation—Active chick embryos obtained from Salmonella Pullorum 
free stock are used. Twelve to thirteen days old embryos are injected with a 
suitable dilution of the suspension of the infected membran e (stock seed viius) 
of chick embryo adapted pigeon pox virus. The suspension of the stock seed 
virus is dropped on the membrane. The inoculated eggs are incubated at 37°C 
for four days. One of the fourth day embryos that are living, are removed to a 
refrigerator for chilling for about one hour. Membranes showing discrete lesions 
(pocks) are harvested. These are homogenised with adequate quantities of 
antibiotics, ampouled in 0.5 ml. quantities and freeze dried. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—Light mauve coloured scales. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) Identification—When reconstituted vaccine is applied to scarified 
area of the skin of a fowl, it produces characteristic lesions of Fowl Pox. 
This product should afford protection against pox. 
(c) Moisture Content—Moisture content in the finished product should 
not exceed 1.0 per cent. 
(d) Safety Test—For testing each batch of chicks aged four to six weeks 
from the same source are taken. This group of twelve birds is immunised 
at least twenty-one days previous to the last, w ith fowl pox vaccine. The 
vaccine under test is reconstituted in 3 ml. of normal saline solution and 
administered as under: 
Three of the test chicks are injected subcutaneously with 0.3 ml. or 10 
times the field dose of the vaccine under test. The group serves to indicate 
whether the product is free from other viruses and bacteria causing of 
septicaemia or not. 
Three of the test chicks are injected intra -trachally with 0.3 ml. or ten 
times the field dose. This group serves to indicate whether the product is 
free from the viruses of infections laryngeotracheiti and similar diseases. 
Three of the test chicks are injected with 0.2 ml. 1/N of the vaccine under 
test. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from the 
virus of coryza and similar diseases. 
The remaining three chicks serve as controls. They are isolated and kept 
under observation for twenty-one days. The birds that succumb during the 
period of observation are subjected to careful post -mortem examination. 
The product is withheld from u ntil the vaccine and the test birds are 
shown to be free from the causative agents of any extraneous disease. 
In addition to the above, similar groups of pigeons aged six to nine 
months old are also injected in a similar way to eliminate psittacosis. 
(e) Sterility Test—Should comply with the tests for sterility described 
under the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccine' 
(f) Potency Test —For testing potency of a batch of vaccine three 
susceptible chicks of three to four weeks of age are vaccinated by feat her 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
forthicle method (a few forthicles on one leg are injected) and these are 
examined for 'takes'. 
Three weeks after vaccination these chicks along with two 
unvaccinated chicks are exposed to challenge virus (virulent fowl pox 
virus) and observed for four teen days. The vaccinated chicks should not 
manifest any reaction while controls should show active 'takes'. 
5. Labelling—Should comply with the requirement for "Labelling" as laid 
down in the general monograph on "Viral Vaccines". 
6. Storage—The freeze dried product is expected to retain its potency for 
periods at temperatures as specified below:— 
—15°C to —20°C — two years 
2°C to 4°C — twelve months 
Room temperature—up to one month. 
SHEEP POX VACCINE (LIVING) 
1. Synonym—Sheep Pox Vaccine: Goat pox vaccine. 
2. Definition—Sheep pox vaccine consists of sheep pox virus collected 
from sheep artificially infected with sheep pox virus and freeze dried. 
3. Preparation—Healthy yearling sheep are infected artificially by 
subcutaneous injection on the undersurface of the previously shaved abdomen 
with 200—300 cc. of the freeze dried sheep pox virus (seed material) diluted in 
1:1 Normal saline solution. On the sixth or seventh day after injection 
oedematous swelling develops in the injected area with the rmal reaction. The 
sheep which develop good swelling are slaughtered and the gelatinous material 
present under the skin in the infected area is collected under sterile conditions. 
This material is mixed with 2 parts by volume of sterile peptone broth of pH 7.2 
and homogenised. The homogenised suspension is filtered ampouled in 0.5 ml. 
quantities and freeze dried. 
4. Standards— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) Description—White Scales. 
(b) Identification—Reconstituted vaccine when applied over the 
scarified area of the skin of the abdominal region of sheep will produce 
characteristic local lesion of pox. 
(c) Moisture content—The moisture content should not exceed 1.0 per 
cent. 
(d) Safety Test —Two rabbits each weighing not less than 1 kg. are 
injected subcutaneously each wi th 1 ml. of 1:100 dilution of the vaccine 
in normal saline solution. These animals are observed for fourteen days. 
The animals should remain normal. 
(e) Sterility Test—Complies with the tests for sterility described under 
the general monograph or 'Viral Vaccine'. 
(f) Potency Test —Four yearling sheep are vaccinated on the inner 
surface of the ear by scarification method. The contents of one ampoule 
of F.D. Sheep Pox vaccine are constituted in 10 cc of 50 per cent 
glycerine saline solution, characteristic takes develop in the scarified area 
with ulceration and scab formation. Three weeks later these and two more 
susceptible sheep (Controls) are challenged by scarifying with a 
suspension of the previous brow of the vaccine of the undersurface of the 
abdomen. The controls should develop typical lesions of pox and the 
vaccinated should remain normal. 
5. Labelling—Should comply with the requirements of 'labelling' as laid 
down in the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccine'. 
6. Storage and expiry date —The vaccine shall be expected to retain its 
potency for periods at temperatures as specified below: 
—15°C to —20°C — two years 
2°C to 4°C — twelve months 
Room temperature—fifiteen days. 
HORSE SICKNESS VACCINE (LIVING) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1. Synonym—African Horse Sickness Vaccin e; Mouse adapted 
Polyvalent Horse Sickness Vaccine (Living). 
2. Definition—Horse sickness vaccine is a suspension of live mouse 
adapted strains of Horse Sickness Virus (onderstepoort) prepared from the 
brains of infected mice and is freeze dried. 
3. Preparation—Thirty to thirty -five-day-old white mice are infected 
intracerebrally with 0.05 ml. of a suitable dilution of the seed virus (6 or 7 
types, as the case may be). Groups of large numbers of mice are injected 
separately with each type of the virus and are housed at 27°C to 32°C. A 
majority of these become paralytic on the third and fourth day when they are 
scarified and their brains collected and stored at —15°C to —20°C till the day 
of processing. For preparing the polyvalent vaccine, equal number of brains 
collected from mice infected with different types of the virus are homogenised 
with 5-10 times its volume of sterile lactose buffer medium (pH 7.2) containing 
antibiotics. The suspension is centrifuged at 1500 r.p.m. for five minutes. The 
supernatant liquid is distributed in ampoules in suitable quantities and freeze 
dried. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—White scaly material.' 
(b) Identification—This product affords protection to horse against 
horse sickness. 
(c) Safety Test —Four healt hy mice thirty to thirty -five days old are 
injected intraperitoneally with 0.2 ml. of 10:1 dilution of the vaccine and 
kept under observation for ten days. All the mice should remain normal 
throughout the period of observation. 
(d) Sterility Test —Should comply with the test for sterility described 
under the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccine'. 
(e) Viability Test—Each batch of vaccine is titrated in tenfold dilutions 
using four mice of thirty to thirty -five days old for each dilution. Each 
mouse is in jected intracerebrally with 0.05 ml. and kept under 
observation for ten days. Mortality and survival ratios are noted and Ld 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
50 is determined. The minimum acceptable titre is 10 -4- Ld 50 per 0.05 
ml. 
5. Labelling—Should comply with the requirements of ' Labelling' as laid 
down in the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccines'. 
6. Storage —The vaccine may be expected to retain its potency for 
twelve months if stored —15°C to —20°C and about six months if stored in 
refrigerator at 2°C to 4°C. 
RABBIES VACCINE (INACTIVATED) 
1. Synonym—Antirabic Vaccine (Inactivated). 
2. Definition—Rabies vaccine is a suspension of the brain tissue of animals, 
that have been infected with a suitable strain of rabies fixed virus, inactivated 
with phenol or some other suitable agent. 
3. The following particulars relating to this vaccine are the same as those 
relating to Antirabic vaccine described in Part D of Schedule F to these rules, 
namely:— 
(i) Strain of fixed Rabies Virus to be used; 
(ii) Staff of Establishment; 
(iii) Condition and housing of animals; 
(iv) Precaution to be observed in preparation; 
(v) Records; 
(vi) Issue. 

4. Preparation—Healthy sheep or any other suitable species of animal 
are inoculated subdurally or intracerebrally with an approp riate dose of 
suspension of a suitable strain of rabbit brain passaged rabies fixed virus. The 
sheep or animals which get paralysed from the sixth day onwards after the 
inoculation are scarified and their brains collected aseptically. Brain tissue is 
weighed individually and a suspension of suitable concentration of brain tissue 
prepared in buffered saline is strained through gauze. The suspension treated 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
with phenol or some other suitable inactivating agent is incubated for an 
appropriate period. 
5. Standards— 
(a) Description—A grey to pale yellow opalescent suspension. 
(b) Identification—Appropriate doses protect mice against subsequent 
intracerebral inoculation with suitable strain of fixed rabies virus. 
(c) Safety Test—Not less than five mice , each weighing at least 18 gm, 
are inoculated intracerebrally with not less than 0.03 ml. of the suitably 
diluted vaccine. None of the animals should show symptoms of rabies or 
die of the disease during period of observation of three weeks. 
(d) Sterility Test —Should comply with the test for sterility described 
under the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccine'. 
6. Labelling—Should comply with the requirements of 'Labelling' as laid 
down in the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccine'. In addition the label o n the 
container shall indicate the percentage of brain-tissue present in the vaccine. 
7. Storage—The vaccine may be expected to retain its potency for about 
six months if stored in refrigerator at 2°C to 4°C. 
RABIES VACCINE (LIVING) 
1. Definition—Rabies vaccine (living) is a freeze dried suspension of 
chick-embryo tissue infected with a suitable attenuated strain of rabies virus. 
2. Preparation—It may be prepared by the following method. Seed virus 
consisting of a suspension of the Flury or other s uitable strain of chick adapted 
virus that has been maintained by passage in chick embroys is injected into the 
yolksacs of fertile eggs incubated for a suitable period. After incubation for a 
further ten days, the embroys, are harvested and grind in water for injection to 
give 33 per cent suspension. The suspension is centrifuged to remove coarse 
particles and the supernatant fluid is distributed into ampoules in 3 millilitre 
quantities, and freeze -dried. The vaccine is reconstituted immediately before 
use by adding 3 millilitres of water for injection to the contents of an ampoule. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. Standard—It complies with the requirements of general standard of 
viral vaccines for abnormal toxicity, sterility, and labelling with the following 
additions:— 
(a) Description—Dry honey-coloured flakes or powder, readily dispersible 
in water. 
(b) Identification—It protects guinea -pig against a subsequent inoculation 
of rabies street virus. It is distinguished from the inactivated rabies vaccine 
by its ability to produ ce rabies encephalitic on intracerebral injection into 
mice. 
(c) Safety Test —The guinea-pigs used in the test for potency should not 
show any marked local or systemic reaction during the three weeks 
following injection with the vaccine. 
(d) Sterility Test—Complies with the tests for sterility described under the 
general monograph on 'Viral vaccine'. 
(e) Potency Test—The contents of an ampoule are dispersed in water for 
injection to give a 5 per cent suspension and not fewer than twenty guinea -
pigs, drawn from a uniform stock and each weighing 350g to 500g, are each 
injected intramuscularly with 0.25 ml. of this suspension. Three weeks later, 
these guinea -pigs and an equal number of similar unvaccinated control 
guinea-pigs are each inoculated with 0. 1 ml. of a suitable dilution of canine 
salivary gland suspension of street virus which is maintained as a 20 per cent 
suspension at 70°C or lower. The guinea -pigs are observed for thirty days; 
not less than 80 per cent of the control guinea -pigs die of rabies and not less 
than 70 per cent of the vaccinated guinea-pigs are protected. 
4. Storage—Freeze-dried vaccine should be stored at refrigeration 
temperatures 2°C to 4°C. 
5. Labelling—The life of the vaccine at room temperature and at 
refrigeration temperature should be stated on the label. 
6. (a) Action and uses —Rabies vaccine (living) is used for the 
prophylactic inoculation of dogs against rabies; one injection should provoke a 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
serviceable immunity lasting for at least a year. The vaccine has bee n used to a 
limited extent on cattle. 
(b) Dose —By intramuscular injection : Dogs, the contents of one ampoule 
reconstituted in 3 ml. of water for injection; cattle five times the dog dose. 
RANIKHET DISEASE VACCINE (LIVING) 
1. Synonym—New castle disease Vaccine (Living); pheumoenteritis 
Vaccine (Living). 
2. Definition—Ranikhet Disease vaccine is a suspension of a modified 
living virus e.g. its, (Mukteswar strain) prepared from infected embroys and 
fluids and is freeze dried. 
3. Preparation—Good fert ile eggs obtained from Salmonella pullorum 
free flock are incubated in an egg incubator. Ten days old vigorous embroys are 
infected with 0.1 ml. of a suitable dilution of a suspension of the virus. 
Inoculation is done in the allantoic cavity. Embroys are i ncubated at suitable 
temperature. Eggs showing dated embryos twenty -four hours after incubation 
are discarded. After forty-eight hours incubation the eggs are candled and those 
showing dead embryos are chilled for a suitable period of time, while embryos 
alive beyond forty -eight hours are discarded. The fluids and embryos are then 
collected and spot haemogglutination carried out. The material is homogenised 
in a blender and ampouled in a aliquots of 0.5 ml. quantities and freeze dried. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—Light brown scales. 
(b) Identification—This product affords protection to fowls against 
Ranikhet Disease. 
(c) Safety Test—For testing each batch of freeze dried Ranikhet Disease 
Vaccine, twelve healthy young chickens, all from the same source each 
weighing not less than lOOg. are taken and immunised against Ranikhet 
Disease. Fourteen days later, these birds are tested as follows with the 
contents of one ampoule suspended in 100 ml. of normal saline. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Three of the test birds are injected subcutaneously with 0.1 ml. equivalent 
to ten times the field dose of the vaccine to be tested. This group serves to 
indicate whether the product is free from viruses or organisms of 
septicaemica disease. Three of the test birds are injected intratracheall y 
with 0.1 ml. equivalent to ten times the field does of the vaccine to be 
tested. This group serves to indicate whether the product is free from the 
virus of infectious laryngotracheitis, 1096[***] and similar diseases. 
The three remaining birds serve as controls. 
1097[Three of the test birds are injected intranasally with 0.2 ml. of the 
vaccine to be tested. This group serves to indicate whether the product is 
free from virus of Coryza and similar diseases.] 
All the treated birds and controls are observed daily for fourteen days. All 
the test birds that succumb are subjected to careful post -mortem 
examination. The product is not issued until the birds under test are 
shown to be free from the causative agents of any extraneous diseases. 
(d) Sterility Test—Should comply with the test for sterility described in 
the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccine'. 
(e) Potency Test—Four susceptible birds eight to twelve weeks old and 
each weighing not less than 400 g. are vaccinated by injecting 
subcutaneously 1 ml. of a 10' 5 dilution of the product. Two weeks after 
vaccination these birds and four non -protected birds are challenged by 
injecting subcutaneously each with 1.0 ml. of a 1:100 dilution of virulent 
virus (liver and spleen suspension) or 1.0 ml. of a 1:100 dilution of fluid 
from the embryo infected with virulent Ranikhet Disease virus. The non-
protected birds should show symptoms of Ranikhet Disease and die and 
all the protected birds should remain normal during an observation period 
of fourteen days. 
5. Labelling—Should comply with the requirements of "Labelling" as laid 
down in the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccines'. 
6. Storage—The vaccine when stored at -15°C to -20°C may be expected 
to retain the potency for about one year and about three months if stored in a 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
refrigerator at 2°C to 4°C. The product should not be used if stored for more 
than ten days outside the refrigerator. 
RANIKHET DISEASE VACCINE F. STRAIN (LIVING) 
1. Synonyms—New castle disease vaccine F. Strain (Living). 
2. Definition—Ranikhet disease vaccine F. Strain is a suspension of a 
naturally modified living virus (F. strain) prepared from the infected embryos, 
devoid of beaks and eyes and fluids in a frozen state. 
3. Preparation—Good fertile eggs obtained from Salmonella pullorum 
free flock are incubated in an egg incubator. Eight days old vigorous embryos 
are infected with 0.1 ml. of 1:100 suspension of Ranikhet Disease vaccine F 
strain virus. Inoculation is done via the allantoic cavity. Embryos are incubated 
at 37°C. Eggs are candled every day up to four days and the dead ones are 
discarded. Final candling of the embryos is carried out on the fourth day and 
only the living ones are chilled in a refrigerator for one hour. The fluids 
embryos are collected separately. The fluids are tested for spot 
haemogglutination and sterility test is carried out. The beaks and eye balls of the 
embryos are removed. The materials are homogenised with adequate quantities 
of antibiotics in a cool warning blender and ampouled in aliquots of 0.5 ml. 
quantity and freeze dried. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—Light brown scales. 
(b) Identification—This product affords protection to baby chicks 
against Ranikhet disease. 
(c) Moisture content—The moisture content should not exceed 1098[1.0] 
per cent. 
(d) Potency Test —For testing each batch of the vaccine twelve one -
day-old chicks are given two drops 1/N of the field dose of the vaccine (5 
ampoules selected at random may be reconstituted in 50 ml.) of cold 
normal saline solution. These are observed for fourteen days and the 
vaccinated chicks should remain normal throughout the period of 
observation. This serves the safety test also. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
On the fourteenth day the vac cinated chicks are challenged with two 
drops 1 : 50 virulent Ranikhet Disease virus along with 8 control chicks. 
Four of the controls receive two drops 1/N of the virulent virus while the 
rest of the four receive 0.5 ml. of the virulent vims. The control c hicks 
should succumb to the challenge virus showing symptoms of Ranikhet 
Disease while the protected chicks should remain normal throughout the 
observation period of fourteen days. 
(e) Sterility Test—Should comply with the tests for sterility described in 
the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccines'. 
5. Labelling—Should comply with the requirements of 'Labelling' as laid 
down in the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccines'. 
6. Storage—The vaccine when stored at -15°C to -20°C may be expected to 
retain the p otency for about one year and about three months if stored in a 
refrigerator at 2°C to 4°C. When removed from the refrigerator, the product 
should not be used later than ten days. 
RINDERPEST GOAT ADAPTED TISSUE VACCINE (LIVING) 
1. Synonym—Goat-adapted Cat tle Plague Vaccine; Goat Tissue Vaccine 
(Living). 
2. Definition—Rinderpest Goat-adapted Tissue Vaccine is the homogenised 
freeze dried preparation of spleen pulp of goats artificially infected with the 
suitable strain of rinderpest virus. 
3. Preparation—Healthy susceptible goats are quarantined for a period of 
ten days. After this period a batch of selected goats are injected subcutaneously 
with 2 ml. of a suitable dilution of the suspension of the seed virus. The donor 
goats are scarified after a suitab le period when the litre of the virus in the 
animal body is expected to be maximum, usually four days, and the spleen from 
animals free from any pathological change or signs are collected under sterile 
conditions. Smear from each spleen is examined microsc opically to exclude 
spleen which are contaminated from the production batch. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
The spleen is freed from fat and fascia and is blended into a smooth pulp in a 
grinder. The pulp is spread on a shallow dish of glass or stainless steel and is 
freeze dried. 
The f reeze dried pulp is then ground in a fine powder and sieved. The 
powder is ampouled in 0.25 g. or 0.125 g. quantities and freeze dried. 
4. Standard— 
(a) Description—Dark brown or chocolate coloured scales or powder. 
(b) Identification—The product affords protection to susceptible 
animals against rinderpest. 
(c) Moisture content—Not more than 1.0 per cent. 
(d) Safety Test —Each batch of vaccine shall be tested for safety in 
laboratory animals and cattle or buffalo calves as follows:— 
(i) Small animals—At least two guinea -pigs each weighing 300 
g. to 450 g. and two adult rabbits each weighing 1 kg. to 1.5 kg. 
should be injected each with 1 ml. of 1:100 suspension of the 
vaccine subcutaneously and kept under observation for seven days. 
None of the animals should die. Alternatively, a batch of six white 
mice each weighing not less than 18 g. may be used, each mouse 
receiving 0.5 ml. of a dilution 1:100 suspension subcutaneously. 
None of the animals should die. 
(ii) Large animals—Either cattle of good grade of susceptibility 
(hill cattle) or buffalo calves may be employed. For each batch of 
vaccine, three animals should be injected subcutaneously with 1 
ml. of 1:8000 dilution of the vaccine. These animals should be kept 
under observation for twelve to fourteen days. None of the animals 
should show any untoward reactions. 
(e) Sterility Test—Complies with the tests for sterility described under 
the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccines'. 
(f) Potency test —The animals receiving 1 ml. 1:8000 dilu tion of 
vaccine used under safety test mentioned above and kept under 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
observation for fourteen days should be challenged with 1 ml. of 1 per 
cent suspension of stock Rinderpest Virulent virus. None of the animals 
should die of rinderpest within a period of ten days. This test serves as a 
short potency test for each of the batches. 
For conducting a detailed potency test the following procedure may be 
followed:— Dilution 1:8000, 1:12000 and 1:16000 shall be tested and for 
each dilution three susceptible cattl e or buffalo calves should be used. 
Each animal is inoculated subcutaneously with 1 ml. of a dilution of the 
vaccine, followed twelve of fourteen days later with a standard challenge 
dose of virulent rinderpest bull virus containing in 1 ml. of a 1:100 
suspension of spleen tissue. Two unvaccinated bovines, each receiving 
the same quantity of the challenge dose act as controls. These are kept 
under observation for fourteen days. The end point of protection titre is 
assessed on the death or survival rate and the dose contained in one 
gramme of vaccine calculated on the basis of 20 to 40 minimum 
protective doses being equivalent to one vaccinating dose. 
(g) Virulence and viability Test —Two to four goats each weighing not 
less than 18 kg. are injected with 2 ml. of 1:100 suspension of the vaccine 
and kept under observation for ten days. These animals should show 
reaction characterised by pyrexia (rise of about 2°C) anorexia and 
dullness. 
5. Labelling—Should comply with the requirement of 'Labelling' as laid 
down in the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccines'. 
6. Storage—The vaccine may be expected to retain its potency for twelve 
months if stored at -15°C to -20°C or about three months if stored at 2°C to 4°C. 
RINDERPEST LAPINISED VACCINE (LIVING) 
1. Synonym—Rabbit Adapted Cattle Plague Vaccine (Living) Lapinised 
Vaccine (Living). 
2. Definition—Rinderpest Lapinised Vaccine is a suspension of a 
modified living virus (e.g., Nakamura III Strain) prepared with the blood spleen 
and mesenteric lymph glands of infected rabbits and is freeze dried. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. Preparation—Adult rabbits possibly from a known stock, each 
weighing not less than 1 kg. free from cocidiosis and snuffles, are injected 
intravenously with 1 ml. of a suitable dilution of a suspension of the stock seed 
virus. Donor rabbits are scarified after a suitable period when the titre of the 
virus in the animals is expected to be the maximum usually the third day. 
Ten millilitres of blood is collected from each rabbit in a defibrinating flask 
under aseptic c ondition. Later the animals are sacrificed and the spleen and 
mesenteric lymph glands collected. Each rabbit is subjected to a thorough post -
mortem examination to observe lesions of rinderpest infection. 
After harvesting, the blood and the organs (spleen a nd glands) are 
homogenised in suitable proportion if necessary. Adequate quantities of 
penicillin and streptomycin may be added. The homogenised material is 
ampouled in suitable quantities and freeze dried. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—Dark chocolate coloured mass. 
(b) Identification—This product affords protection to susceptible 
animals against rinderpest. 
(c) Moisture content—Not more than 1.0 per cent. 
(d) Safety Test —For testing a batch 2 guinea -pigs each weighing not 
less than 300 g. ar e injected subcutaneously with 1 ml. of a 1:100 
suspension of the vaccine. Alternatively, a group of six white mice each 
weighing not less than 18 g. is used. Each animal receives subcutaneously 
0.5 ml. of 1:100 suspension of the vaccine. None of the test animals 
should die within a period of seven days. 
(e) Sterility Test—Should comply with the tests for sterility described in 
the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccines'. If antibiotics have been added 
the inoculum should be neutralised before doing the test. 
(f) Potency Test—Dilutions 1:100,1:200,1:400 and 1:800 shall be tested 
and for Qach dilution 2 susceptible cattle (hill bulls) or buffalo calves 
should be used. Each animal is inoculated subcutaneously with 1 ml. of a 
dilution of the vaccine, follow ed twenty -one days later with a standard 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
challenge dose of a virulent rinderpest bulls virus contained in 1 ml. of a 
1:100 suspension of spleen tissue. Two unvaccinated bovines each 
receiving the same quantity of the challenge virus serve as controls. 
These animals are kept under observation for fourteen days. The end 
point of the protecting titre is assessed on the death or survival rate and 
the dose contained in one gramme of vaccine calculated on the basis of 
twenty minimum protective doses being equival ent to one vaccinating 
dose. 
(g) Virulence and Viability Test —Four rabbits each weighing 1 to 1.5 
kg. are injected subcutaneously with 1 ml of 1:100 suspension of the 
vaccine. The animals should react typically showing all the symptoms of 
rinderpest in rabbit. 
5. Labelling—Should comply with the requirements of 'Labelling' as laid 
down in the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccine'. 
6. Storage—The vaccine may be expected to retain its potency for six 
months if stored at —15°C to —20°C or about a month if stored at 2°C to 4°C. 
RINDERPEST LAPINISED AVIANISED VACCINE (LIVING) 
1. Synonym—Lapinised Avianised Vaccine (Living). 
2. Definition—Rinderpest Lapinised Avianised Vaccine is a suspension of 
a modified live rinderpest virus of low virulence prepa red either with the whole 
chick embryo or the viscera of the infected chick embryo. 
3. Preparation—Twelve or thirteen days old active chick embryos from a 
flock free from Salmonella pullorum infection are injected intravenously with a 
suitable dilution of the suspension of the stock seed virus in six per cent glucose 
solution. The embryos are incubated at 38.5°C for five days. At the end of this 
incubation period, eggs which show living embryos are selected for the 
preparation of the vaccine. The viscera of the chicks are harvested, care being 
taken to reject of gizzard and gall bladders. The material is homogenised in a 
blender with adequate quantities of antibiotics (penicillin and streptomycin 
added if necessary), and primary freeze dried done. This fr eeze dried material is 
ground into a fine powder, ampouled in suitable quantities and finally subjected 
to secondary freeze drying and sealed under vacuum. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—Pale cream or yellow coloured sterile powder. 
(b) Identification—This product affords good grade of immunity to 
susceptible animals against rinderpest. 
(c) Moisture content—Not more than 1.0 per cent. 
(d) Safety test —For testing each batch, a group of six mice each 
weighing not less than 18 g. is used. Each mo use is injected 
subcutaneously with 0.5 ml. of a 1:100 suspension. Alternatively, two 
guinea pigs each weighing not less than 300g. and two rabbits each 
weighing not less than 1 kg. are injected with 1 ml. of 1:100 suspension 
subcutaneously. These animals should not show any untoward reaction 
during the period of observation for seven days. 
(e) Sterility test—Should comply with the test for sterility as laid down 
in the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccines'. 
(f) Potency test—Healthy highly susceptible ca ttle (hill bulls) or buffalo 
calves should not be used for testing the potency of each batch of vaccine 
in suitable dilution. For each dilution two highly susceptible animals 
should be used. Each animal is inoculated subcutaneously with 1 ml. of a 
dilution of the vaccine, followed twenty -one to twenty -eight days after 
with a standard challenge dose of a virulent rinderpest bull virus 
contained in I ml. of a 1:100 suspension of spleen tissue. Two 
unvaccinated bovines, each receiving the same quantity of the challenge 
virus serve as controls. All these animals are kept under observation for 
fourteen days. The end point of protective titre is assessed on the death or 
survival rate and the dose contained in one gramme of vaccine calculated 
on the basis of forty minimum protective doses being equivalent to one 
vaccinating dose. 
5. Labelling—Should comply with the requirements of 'Labelling' as laid 
down in the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccine'. 
6. Storage and Expiry Date —The vaccine shall be expected to r etain its 
potency for the period at temperatures as specified below: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
—15°C to —20°C — Six months. 
2°C to 4°C. — One months. 
SHEEP AND GOAT POX VACCINE (LIVING) 
1. Synonym—Sheep Pox vaccine. Goat Pox vaccine. 
2. Definition—Sheep and Goat Pox Vac cine consists of the virus 
contained in the scabs collected from sheep artificially infected with the virus. 
3. Preparation—Healthy yearling sheep are infected artificially on the 
shaved portion of the abdomen with a suitable dilution of the suspension of the 
stock seed virus 50 per cent glycerine saline solution. The material from the 
semi-dried areas where the pock lesions are evident is collected and dried over 
calcium chloride or phosphorous pentoxide under vacuum. Dry scabs are 
powdered, sieved, ampouled in suitable quantities and sealed. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—Light cream coloured powder. 
(b) Identification—This product when applied to scarified area of the skin of 
the sheep or goats produces characteristic local lesions of pox and s hould afford 
protection to sheep and goat against Sheep and Goat Pox. 
(c) Safety Test —Two rabbits each weighing not less than 1 kg are injected 
subcutaneously each with 1 ml. of a 1:100 dilution of the vaccine in normal 
saline solution. These animals ar e observed for fourteen days. The animals 
should remain normal. 
(d) Sterility Test —Complies with the tests for sterility described under the 
general monograph on 'Viral Vaccines'. 
(e) Potency Test—Four yearling sheep are inoculated with 1:100 suspens ion 
of the vaccine in 50 per cent glycerine saline on a scarified area on the 
abdomen. Fourteen days later, these and two more susceptible sheep are 
inoculated by the same method with stock virus and observed for a period of 
fourteen days. The control anim als should develop typical lesions of pox and 
the vaccinated animals should remain normal. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
5. Labelling—Should comply with the requirements of 'Labelling' as laid 
down in the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccine'. 
6. Storage and Expiry Date —The vaccine s hall be expected to retain its 
potency for the period at temperatures as specified below: 
—15°C to —20°C — Twenty months. 
2°C to 4°C. — Three months. 
Room temperature — Fifteen days. 
FOWL SPIROCHAETOSIS VACCINE (CHICK EMBRYO ORIGIN) 
1. Synonym—Tick Fever Vaccine. 
2. Definition—The vaccine consists of a merthiolated suspension of 
chorioallantoic membrane, internal viscera and blood of chick embryos infected 
with a vaccine strain of spirochaetes and freeze dried. 
3. Preparation—Eleven days old developing chick embryos are infected 
with 0.2 ml. of sterile fresh blood containing spirochaetes via the 
chorioallantoic membrane. The inoculated embryos are incubated at 37°C and 
candled daily and the dead ones are discarded. On the seventh day the living 
embryos are chilled in the refrigerator for two hours. The chilled embryos are 
harvested separately and necrotic lesions in liver noted. Representative samples 
of blood should be examined for teaming spirochaetes. The internal vicera, 
chorio allanotic membranes and the blood are collected. The material is pooled, 
weighed and held in deep freeze at —15°C to —20°C for period of one week. 
Thereafter the material is blended with equal quantity of Merthiolate (final 
concentration of merthiolate in the suspension should be 1:10,000) thoroughly 
for three times, each time the motor running at full speed and the vaccine is 
ampouled in 2 ml. quantities and freeze dried. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—Light brownish scales. 
(b) Identification—The vaccine affords protection when inoculated into 
the fowls against spirochaetosis. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(c) Moisture content—The moisture content should not exceed 1.0 per 
cent. 
(d) Safety and Potency Test—Six healthy cockerels ten to twelve weeks 
old are used for this p urpose. Each ampoule of vaccine is reconstituted in 
10 ml. of cold distilled water and the six cockerels are injected 
intramuscularly each with 1 ml. of the reconstituted vaccine and the birds 
are observed for a period of ten days and the vaccinated birds should 
remain normal throughout the period of observation. The vaccinated birds 
are challenged with 0.2 ml. intramuscularly with virulent spirochaete 
blood along with two susceptible controls. Temperature and blood smear 
examination of the challenged birds and controls should be carried out 
daily for a period of ten days. The blood smears of vaccinated birds 
should remain negative for spirochaetes during the entire period of 
observation. The controls should react and show spirochaetes in the 
blood. 
(e) Sterility Test—Complies with the tests for sterility described in the 
general monograph on 'Bacterial Vaccine'. 
5. Labelling—Should comply with the requirements of 'Labelling' as laid 
down in the general monograph on 'Bacterial Vaccine'. 
6. Storage— The vaccine when stored at —15°C to —20°C may be 
expected to retain the potency for about one year and about two months if stored 
in refrigerator at 2°C to 4°C. 
SWINE FEVER VACCINE CRYSTAL VIOLET 
1. Synonym—Crystal Violet Swine Fever vaccine, Hog Cholera Vaccine. 
2. Definition—Swine fever vaccine, crystal violet is a suspension of 
blood of swine that have been infected with a suitable virulent anti -genic strain 
of swine fever virus, inactivated with 0.25 per cent crystal violet ethylene glycol 
at 37°C for fourteen days. 
3. Preparation—Susceptible healthy pigs of six to seven months of age 
belonging to a well established strain or breed are used. Body weight of these 
animals of this age may vary according to the breed but optimum weight is 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
considered as between 75 to 100 kg. Animals used for production may be 
procured from well established farms and kept under quarantine for fourteen 
days. These are injected intramuscularly with a suitable dilution of the 
suspension of the virulent blood viruses. Bleed ing of the clinically injected 
animals is carried out on the sixth day. The defibrinated blood from each animal 
is strained and stored separately in sterile glass containers. To the four parts of 
defibrinated bloods, one part of 0.25 per cent crystal viole t—ethylene glycol is 
added and the suspension after thorough mixing, is stored at 37°C ( - 0.5) for 
two weeks. The product is filled in 20 ml. volumes in sterile vials and labelled 
on the completion of tests. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—Very dark violet suspension. 
(b) Identification—This product affords protection against swine fever 
but not against African Swine Fever. 
(c) Safety Test—Two young pigs weighing about 15 to 30 kg. are 
injected subcutaneously each with 40 ml. of the vacci ne batch to be 
tested. In addition, one unvaccinated susceptible pig is placed in contact. 
(d) Sterility Test —Should comply with the test for sterility described 
under the general monograph in 'Viral Vaccines'. 
(e) Abnormal toxicity test —Two guinea-pigs are given 1 ml. of 
vaccine intramuscularly. 
Two guinea-pigs are given 2 ml. of the vaccine intraperitoneally. 
Two mice are given 0.5 ml. of the vaccine subcutaneously. 
(f) Potency Test —Four susceptible pigs weighing between 20 -30 kg. 
are injected with 5 ml. of the vaccine subcutaneously. After twenty -one 
days these are challenged with 1ml. of suitable dilution of the challenge 
virus subcutaneously. The dose must contain at least 1000 minimum 
infective doses. At least two control pigs should be used. 
5. Labelling—Should comply with the requirements of 'Labelling' as laid 
down in the general monograph on 'Bacterial Vaccine'. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6. Storage. -The vaccine may be expected to retain the potency for twelve 
months if stored in refrigerator at 2°C to 4°C. 
SWINE FEVER VACCINE LAPINISED (LIVING) 
1. Synonym—Lapinised swine fever vaccine, freeze dried lapinised swine 
fever vaccine. 
2. Definition.—Swine fever lapinised vaccine consists of the suspension 
of a modified live swine fever virus prepared fro m spleens of infected rabbits 
and is freeze dried. 
3. Preparation—Healthy adult rabbits weighing approximately 1000 
gms. or over, free from coccidiosis snuffles etc. are injected intravenously with 
a suitable dose of a dilution of the modified rabbit ad apted virus. Rabbits are 
sacrified at the height of reaction and spleens are collected with sterile 
precautions. The collection is later homogenised in a blender using ten per cent 
yolk phosphate buffer as a diluent. The suspension is ampouled in 0.5 ml. 
quantities and freeze dried. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description— Light Scales. 
(b) Identification— This product affords protection against swine 
fever. 
(c) Moisture content—The moisture content should not exceed 1.0 
per cent. 
(d) Safety Test—Six mice are injected each with 0.5 ml. of a 1:100 
suspension of the vaccine. These are kept under observation for seven 
days. None should die. 
(e) Viability Test —Two healthy rabbits are injected intramuscularly 
with 1 ml. of 1:100 suspension of the vaccine. These animals show 
thermal reaction. 
(f) Sterility Test —Should comply with the test for sterility described 
under general monograph on 'Viral Vaccine'. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(g) Potency Test —The vaccine batch under test should be tested on 
susceptible healthy pigs weighi ng between 20 -30 kg. Two animals for 
each dilution may be used. The dilutions tested are 1:10,1:15,1:50 and 
1:100. One millilitre of each of these dilutions is injected subcutaneously. 
One healthy, susceptible, unvaccinated in contact animal should be kept 
along with the vaccinated animals. 
Fourteen to twenty -one days later these animals along with two 
controls are injected subcutaneously with 1 ml. of the challenge virus 
containing at least 1000 minimum infective doses. 
5. Labelling—Should comply with th e requirements of 'Labelling' as laid 
down in the general monograph or 'Viral Vaccines'. 
6. Storage—The vaccine may be expected to retain its potency for six 
months if stored at temperature ranging between —10°C to —15°C and for 
seven days at 2°C to 4°C in the refrigerator. 
1099 [FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE VACCINE (INACTIVATED) 
1. Synonym—Inactivated Tissue culture mono or polyvalent Food and 
Mouth Disease Vaccine. 
2. Definition—Foot and Mouth Disease Vaccine is a liquid pro duct or 
preparation containing one or more types of foot and mouth disease virus which 
have been inactivated in such a way that its immunogenic property is 
maintained. It may also contain an adjuvant. The vaccine is described as 
monovalent, bivalent, trivalent or polyvalent depending on the number of types 
of virus used. 
3. Preparation—The virus is propagated in suitable cell culture. The cell 
culture is infected with an appropriate inoculum of virus and incubated at a 
suitable temperature for multiplica tion of virus. The virus is harvested and 
cellular debris removed by Alteration. Inactivation is carried out by a suitable 
agent such as formaldehyde solution or an aziridine compound. The adjuvant 
may be aluminium hydroxide and/or saponin. In case of inac tivated gel vaccine 
the antigen is concentrated by sedimentation at plus 4 degree C. For preparing a 
polyvalent vaccine, monovalent antigens are mixed in appropriate quantities to 
give the final mixture which is the formulated vaccine. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description— Aluminium hydroxide gel vaccines settle down to 
variable degree on storage leaving the supernatant clear. 
(b) Identification—It protects cattle against Food and Mouth Disease 
due to homologous type/sub-type of virus. 
(c) Sterility test—It shall comply with the tests for sterility as prescribed 
under the general monograph of "viral vaccines". 
(d) Safety test —The test is carried out on fully susceptible cattle not 
less than 12 months of age and which have not been sensitized either by 
vaccination or previous infection. Inoculate 3 susceptible cattles each 
with 2 ml. of finished product at multiple sites on tongue by intradermal 
route and observe for 4 days. The same animals are inoculated on 4th day 
with 3 cattle doses subcutaneously and are observed for a further period 
of 6 days. The animals should not develop any signs of FMD and remain 
normal. 
(e) Potency test —Each batch of the vaccine is to be tested in 
susceptible cattle of not less than 15 months of age. The potency test in 
cattle can be done either by: 
(i) PD50 method—The vaccine shall be tested by the 
determination of PD 50 in susceptible cattle by challenging animals 
vaccinated with appropriate dilution of the vaccine made in 
adjuvanted or non-adjuvanted diluent as appropriate. 
A minimum of 5 animals should be used per dilution and 2 
unvaccinated animals to be included as controls to the challenge. 
All animals are needle challenged with 10,000 ID 50 of the 
homologous strain of virus by inoculation on the tongue on the 21st 
day of post-vaccination. 
The control animals are to be similarly challenged. Animals are 
observed for 10 days for the development of lesions. Unprotected 
animals shows generalised lesions due to FMD. Control animals 
must show generalised lesions, from the num ber of animals 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
protected in each group the PD S0 content of the vaccine is 
calculated. The vaccine passes the test if an observed PD 50 value of 
3 or greater is obtained in the test. 
(ii) Percentage protection method in which groups of ten healthy 
susceptible cattle are each injected subcutaneously with the 
vaccinating dose and 14 — 21 days later the cattle are challenged 
by intradermal injection into three separate sites on the tongue with 
10,000 ID 50 of the strain of virus used in the preparation of the 
vaccine. The vaccine can be passed if at least seven out of the ten 
in the group are protected against the development of generalised 
infection whereas all the controls should react by developing 
primary and secondary lesions observable in the mouth and feet. 
For other reasons and if cattle testing is not possible then the 
potency of the vaccine may be assessed in guinea pigs either by 
Lucam 'C' index or PD 50 method by challenging those which have 
been previously vaccinated, provided that a correlation has b een 
established between guinea pig challenge test and cattle challenge 
results. 
The estimation of serum neutralizing antibody titre in cattle may 
be considered as a supportive test to evaluate potency of vaccine. 
However, potency testing of vaccines in cat tle, of batches 
whenever by other accepted methods of testing is in doubt, at least 
one out of every five batches, be undertaken. 
5. Labelling—It is labelled as described under the requirements of 
'Labelling' as laid down in the general monograph, with the additional 
requirements that the label on the container states the virus types used in the 
preparation. 
6. Storage—It should be protected from light and stored between 4°C to 
8°C. Under these conditions it may be expected to retain its potency for n ot less 
than 12 months. Freezing of aluminium hydroxide vaccine must be avoided. 
The frozen product will not be fit for use.] 
CANINE HEPATITIS VACCINE (LIVING) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1. Synonym—Infectious Canine Hepatitis Vaccine (Living), Canine 
Hepatitis Cell Culture Vaccine. 
2. Definition—Canine Hepatitis Vaccine (Living) as a freeze dried 
preparation of tissue culture fluid containing the cell culture adopted canine 
hepatitis virus. 
3. Preparation—Canine hepatitis vaccine shall be prepared from virus 
bearing cell culture fluid. 
Only stock seed virus which has been established as pure, safe and 
immunogenic shall be used in the preparation of the vaccine. 
Immunogenicity test—Each lot of stock seed virus shall be tested for 
immunogenicity as follows:— 
Thirteen Canine Hep atitis susceptible dogs, 8 -14 weeks old shall be 
used for the test (10 vaccinates and 3 controls). Blood samples may be 
drawn from these animals and individual serum samples tested for the 
presence of antibodies against canine hepatitis virus. Ten dogs sha ll be 
injected subcutaneously with predetermined quantity of the virus and 
remaining 3 dogs are kept as unvaccinated controls. The dose calculation 
will be based on virus titration in suitable cell culture system. Not less 
than 14 days post vaccination, th e vaccinated and controls shall each be 
challenged intravenously with virulent infectious canine hepatitis virus 
and observed daily for 14 days. At least 2 out of 3 controls should die and 
the survivors shall show the clinical signs of canine hepatitis. Ni ne out of 
ten vaccinated dogs shall survive and shall not show any signs of 
infectious canine hepatitis during the observation period. 
The stock seed virus shall be tested once in 5 years and maintained 
under standard conditions as prescribed. 
The stock se ed virus may be inoculated on a suitable tissue culture 
system and may be incubated for five to seven days. 
The tissue culture fluid is then harvested and titrated in cell culture 
system for virus content. After appropriate dilution and pooling, the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
material is stored at minus 20°C until freeze dried. Each vaccine dose 
shall contain not less than 103.5 TCID50 dose. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—The dried product is a pinkish cream material readily 
dispersible in water. The reconstituted vaccine is a pinkish liquid. 
(b) Identification—It causes characteristic cytopathic effect in dog, pig 
and ferret kidney monolayers. This can be neutralised by specific 
antiserum. When inoculated into dogs, the development of specific 
neutralizing antibodies can be demonstrated by suitable serological tests. 
(c) Moisture content—In the finished product moisture content shall not 
exceed 1.0 per cent. 
(d) Sterility test—Shall comply with the tests for sterility as described 
under the general monograph on "Viral Vaccines". 
(e) Safety test— 
Mouse safety test — Vaccine prepared for use as recommended on 
the label shall be tested. Eight mice shall be inoculated 
intracerebrally with 0.3 ml. and 8 mice shall be inoculated 
intiaperitoneally with 0.5 ml. Both the groups shall be observed for 
seven days. If unfavourable reaction attributable to the product 
occurs in two or more mice in either group during their observation 
period, the batch is unsatisfactory. 
Dog Safety test —Each of the two susceptible pups aged 8 -14 
weeks shall be injected with vaccine equivalent of 10 vaccinating 
doses from the batch reconstituted with sterile diluent and 
administered in the manner recommended on the label and 
observed for 21 days. None of the pups shall show any 
unfavourable reaction during the period of observation. 
(f) Potency test, Virus Titration —Samples of finished product shall be 
tested for virus titre in suitable cell culture system. The batch shall have a 
virus titre of not less than 103.5 TCID50 dose. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Potency test in dogs—Two healthy susceptible dogs of 8-14 weeks 
of age shall be injected subcutaneously with one Vaccine dose. 14 
days after vaccination, specific neutralizing antibodies from both 
the dogs shall be demonstrable by serological tests. 
5. Labelling-—Shall comply with the requirements for labelling as laid 
down in the general monograph on "Viral vaccines." 
6. Storage—The dry product shall be stored at temperature of minus 20°C 
or below. The vaccine is expected to retain its potency for about 6 months in 
freezing chamber of the refrigerator (temperature) approximately minus 8°C. 
DUCK PLAGUE VACCINE 
1. Definition—Duck plague vaccine is a suspension of modified living 
virus prepared from infected chick embryos. 
2. Preparation—Fresh fertile hen's eggs obtained from Salmonella free 
flocks are incubated in an Incubator. Nine days old embryos are injected with 
0.2 ml. of the suitable dilution (1 in 100) of the suspension of the virus on the 
CAM and incubated at 37°C for 5 days post -inoculation. Dead embryos of the 
3rd, 4th and 5th days post -inoculation are harvested. The embryos (devoid of 
head and legs), clear fluid and the membranes are collected and homogenised in 
a Blender, ampouled in 0.5 ml. quantities and freeze dried. 
3. Standards— 
(a) Description—Light brown scales. 
(b) Identification—This product affords protection to the ducks against 
duck plague. 
(c) Safety test—Four healthy, 8 to 12 weeks old ducks weighing not less 
than 600 gms. are inoculated subcutaneously with 1ml. of 10-1 dilution of 
the vaccine and observed for a period of 14 days. During the period of 
observation, the ducks shall not show any untoward reaction. 
(d) Sterility test —Shall comply with the test for sterility described in 
the general monograph on "Viral Vaccines". 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(e) Potency test —Six susceptible ducks 8 to 12 weeks old each 
weighing not less than 600 gms. are inoculated subcutaneously with 1 ml. 
of 10-3 dilution of the vaccine. The minimum virus contents in 1 ml. dose 
of the vaccine shall be 10 3.5 EID50. 14 days later these ducks are 
challenged subcutaneously each with 1 ml. of 10 -2 dilution of the virulent 
duck plague virus (1000 DEID 50) alongwith 2 unprotected young ducks 
of about 8-12 weeks age. The unprotected ducks shall show symptoms of 
duck plague and die within 10 day s. While the protected ducks shall 
remain normal during the observation period of 14 days. 
4. Labelling—Should comply with the requirements of labelling as laid 
down in general monograph on "Viral Vaccines". 
5. Storage—Vaccine when stored at minus 15 °C to minus 20°C may be 
expected to retain its potency for one year and about three months if stored in 
the freezing chamber of Refrigerator, i.e. its, minus 5°C. 
AVIAN ENCEPHALOMYELITIS VACCINE (LIVING) 
1. Synonyms—Avian Encephalomyelitis Vaccine Freeze dried. 
2. Definition—A virus bearing tissue and fluid suspension from 
embryonated hen's eggs- 
3. Preparation—The stock seed virus which has been established as pure, 
safe and immunogenic shall be used for preparing the vaccine. 
(i) Each lot of stock seed virus shall be tested for pathogenicity by chicken 
embryo inoculation test: 
(a) One dose of the seed lot shall be mixed with 9 volumes of sterile 
heat inactivated specific, antiserum to neutralise vaccine virus in the 
product. 
(b) After neu tralization, 0.2 ml. of serum vaccine mixture shall be 
inoculated into each of at least 20 fully susceptible chicken embryos (0.1 
ml. of the inculum shall be inoculated on CAM of 9 -11 days old embryos 
and 0.1 ml. in the allantoic sac.) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(c) Eggs shall be candled for 7 days. Deaths occurring during first 24 
hours shall be discarded but at least 18 viable embryos shall survive 24 
hours post inoculation for a valid test. All embryos and CAMs from 
embryos which die after the first day shall be examined. 
(d) If the death or abnormality attributable to the inoculum occur, the 
seed lot is unsatisfactory. 
(ii) Immunogenicity test—Avian encephalomyelitis susceptible chicks, all 
of same age (8 weeks old) shall be used. Twenty chickens shall be inoculated 
with the field dose of the virus by prescribed route. Ten additional chickens 
of same age and flock shall be held as unvaccinated controls. 
At least 21 days post vaccination, the controls and vaccinates shall be 
challenged intracerebrally with Virulent avian en cephalomyelitis virus, and 
observed each for 21 days. At least 80 per cent of controls shall show signs 
of avian encephalomyelitis or die. At least 19 to 20 vaccinates shall remain 
free from clinical avian encephalomyelitis during the observation period fo r 
the stock seed virus to be satisfactory. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—Greyish white flakes easily dispersible in the diluent. 
(b) Identification—At least 5 -6 days old embryonated eggs (from hens 
with no history of infection with avian encephalo myelitis) shall be 
inoculated with 0.1 ml of undiluted vaccine into the yolk sac and kept in 
incubator and then transferred to the brooder where they are allowed to 
hatch. The hatched chicks shall be raised for 7 days. More than 5 per cent 
of hatched chick s shall manifest the typical symptoms (weak -leg, leg 
paralysis tremor etc.) at the end of this period. 
(c) Moisture content—Shall not exceed 1.0 per cent. 
(d) Sterility test —Shall comply with the test for sterility described 
under general monograph on "Viral Vaccines". 
(e) Safety test —At least 25 avian encephalomyelitis susceptible birds 
(6-10 weeks of age) shall be vaccinated with 10 field doses by the 
recommended route and observed each day for 21 days. If unfavourable 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
reactions attributable to t he vaccine occur during the observation period, 
the batch of vaccine is unsatisfactory. 
(f) Potency Test— 
(i) The vaccine shall be titrated for virus content. To be eligible 
for release, the batch shall have a virus titre of at least 10 2.5 EID50 
per dose. 
(ii) At least 10 susceptible chickens shall be vaccinated with the 
field dose of the vaccine by prescribed route and 10 chickens from 
same batch and source shall be kept as unvaccinated controls. 
At least 21 days post -vaccination, both the groups sha ll be 
challenged intracerebrally with Virulent avian encephalomyelitis 
virus and observed for 21 days. At least 8 out of 10 controls shall 
develop recognisable signs or lesions of avian encephalomyelitis 
and at least 8 out of 10 vaccinates should remain normal. 
5. Labelling—Shall comply with the requirement of labelling as laid down 
in general monograph of "Viral Vaccines". 
MAREK'S DISEASE VACCINE (LIVING) 
1. Synonyms— Herpes virus of Turkey vaccine HVT vaccine (Living). 
2. Definition—Marek's disease vaccine is a suspension of cell free fluid 
containing live virus. 
3. Preparation—The stock seed virus which has been established as pure, 
safe and immunogenic in avian species shall be used for preparing the seed 
virus for vaccine production. 
(i) Safety Test —The stock seed virus shall be non -pathogenic for 
chickens as determined by the following procedure: 
The groups of at least 25 chickens each at one day of age shall be used. 
These chickens shall be of the same source and batch, be susceptible to 
Marek' disease and be kept in isolated group. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Group I: Each Chicken shall be injected with 0.2 ml. of 10 times as much 
viable virus as will be contained in one dose of vaccine by intramuscular 
route. 
Group II : Shall serve as controls. At least 20 chickens in each group shall 
survive for four days post injection. All chicken that die shall be 
necropsied and examined for lesions of Marek's disease and cause of 
death . The test shall be judged according to the following:— 
At 120 days of age, the remaining chic ken in both the groups shall be 
weighed, killed and necropsied. If at least 15 chickens in each of these 
two groups have not survived the 120 days period or if any of the 
chickens of Group-I have gross lesions of Marek's disease at necropsy or 
if the avera ge body weight of the chickens in Group I is significantly 
(Statistically) different from the average of Group -II at the end of 120 
days, the lot of stock seed virus is unsatisfactory. 
(ii) Purity test —Shall be conducted in chickens and no lesions other 
than those typical of Turkey Herpes virus shall be evidenced. 
(iii) Immunogenicity test —Sixty susceptible day old chicks are used. 
Thirty of them inoculated with the seed virus in a dose corresponding to 
the field dose of the final vaccine and 14 -21 da ys later challenged by 
intrabdominal route with virulent Marek's disease virus, with the other 30 
non-vaccinated control chicks. At the end of the observation period when 
the chicks are 20 weeks old, the surviving chickens are examined for the 
presence of antibody against Marek's disease by serological tests and 
post-mortem inspection for lesions of Marek's disease. 
Any bird dead is thoroughly examined and the cause of death 
ascertained by necropsy/histopathological examination. All the surviving 
birds are killed and necropsied. The protection index (PI) is determined 
by following procedure: 

1. Per cent. MD = No. with MD lesions _________ 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
No. with MD lesions + No. of -ve Survivours 
(effective No.) 
2. P.I. = Per cent. MD in controls- Per cent. MD in vaccinated x100 
Per cent. MD in controls 
Master seed virus should have P.I. of the least 80 per cent. 
Eighty per cent of the chicks in the control group must fall ill 
specifically. If more than 80 per cent of the vaccinated chickens do not show 
symptoms or signs of Marek's disease, the seed virus is regarded as 
sufficiently effective and can be used for production of vaccine. 
The seed virus is propagated in duck embryo fibro -blast cell culture, 
chick embryo fibroblast or any other sui table cell culture (specific pathogen 
free SPF flock) and when the peak passage level is attained the cell 
monolayer is suspended in cold diluent of the following composition. 
SPGA Stabilizer 
0.218 % sucrose 
0.0038 % monosodium phosphate 
0.0072 % dipotassium phosphate 
L Monosodium glutanate 0.0049 M 
1 per cent bovine albumin Fraction (V) 

0.25 per cent EDTA (Sterilised by Sitz filteration and stored at minus 
10°C). The virus is freed from cells by ultrasonication for 3 minutes 
interrupted after every 30 sec onds) at 100 MA and freeze dried at minus 
60°C preferably in shelf freeze dried in convenient volumes. The doses per 
ampoule vial is calculated after titrating the freeze dried product in terms of 
plaque forming units (PFU) in the corresponding cell monolayers. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—The cell free freeze dried HVT vaccine looks 
uniformly greyish in colour and easily dispersible in the specified diluent. 
(b) Identification—The vaccine on inoculation in suitable cell culture 
system shall cause cy topathic effect typical of Herpes virus of Turkey. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Specific antiserum of Herpes virus of Turkey shall neutralize the 
cytopathic effect. 
(c) Moisture content—Moisture content shall not exceed one per cent. 
(d) Sterility test —Shall comply with the test prescribed in general 
monograph on "Viral Vaccines". 
(e) Safety test—At least 25 one day old chickens shall be injected with 
ten times of the field dose of vaccine by intramuscular route. The 
chickens shall be observed each day for 21 days. Chickens dy ing during 
the period shall be examined, cause of death determined and the results 
recorded as follows:— 
(i) If at least 20 chickens do not survive the observation period, 
the test is inconclusive. 
(ii) If lesions of any disease or cause of death are directly 
attributable to the vaccine the vaccine is unsatisfactory. 
(f) Potency test—The sample shall be titrated in the cell culture system. 
A satisfactory batch shall contain at least 1500 plaque forming units 
(PFU) per dose at the time of release an d maintain at least 1000 PFU till 
the end of expiry period. 
5. Labelling—Shall comply with the requirement of labelling as laid 
down in general monograph of "Viral Vaccines". 
6. Storage and expiry date—The freeze dried call free HVT vaccine 
may be stored at 4°C for 6 months. 
GOAT POX VACCINE (LIVING CELL CULTURE) 
1. Synonym— Goat Pox Vaccine (living), attenuated goat pox vaccine. 
2. Definition—Goat Pox vaccine is freeze dried preparation, prepared by 
growing attenuated goat pox virus in kid kidney/testicular cell culture. 
3. Preparation.—Primary kidney/testicular cell cultures of disease free 
kid are used. The monolayers infected with the seed virus are incubated at 37°C. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
The cultures are harvested by three cycles of freezing the thawings 6 to 7 days 
post infection when more than 80 per cent cells show CPE. The suspension is 
centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 10 minutes to remove cellular debris being stored at 
minus 20°C. The suspension is freeze dried after addition of 5 per cent 
Lactalbumin hydrolysate and 10 per cent sucrose. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—Light yellow colour. 
(b) Identification—The product affords protection to goat against goat 
pox. 
(c) Moisture content—The moisture content shall not exceed 1.0 per 
cent. 
(d) Safety tests— 
(i) Laboratory animals —Six mice, 3 guinea pigs and 3 rabbits 
are inoculated with 0.2 ml. iritraperitoneally, 0.5 ml. and 1.0 ml. 
subcutaneously, respectively with 10 field doses of the vaccine. 
The inoculated animals during the observation period of 80 days 
shall remain normal. 
(ii) Goat—Two susceptible goats of 6 to 8 months of age are 
inoculated in postauxiliary region by subcutaneous route with one 
hundred field dose of the vaccine. The inoculated animals shall not 
develop more than a local reaction 2 to 3 cms. These animals shall 
be observed for 10 days. 
(e) Sterility test —Shall comply with the test for sterility described 
under the general monograph on "Viral Vaccine". 
(f) Titration in cell culture —Four randomly selected samples are 
inoculated in kid kidney cell cultures using 5 tubes for each 
dilution. The titration shall be repeated thrice. One thousand 
TC1D50 is used as a field dose. 
(g) Potency Test —The three susceptible goats (8 -10 months) are 
inoculated with 1/ 10th field dose and 3 susceptible goats (8 -10 
 months) with one field dose, subcutaneously. Three in 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
contact controls are also kept with the inoculated goats. Three 
animals are obse rved for a period of 14 days and their body 
temperature recorded da ily. The vaccinated animals shall not 
 show any thermal, local or generalised reaction. Twenty one 
days post -infection, the vaccinated and controls are challenged 
with 10,000 TCID 50 of virulent goat pox virus by intradermal 
route. The temperature o f these goats are recorded for a period of 
14 days. The vaccinated goats shall not develop localised or 
generalised reaction while control goats shall develop high fever, 
localised reaction or even generalised reaction in some cases. 
5. Labelling—Shall comply with the requirement of labelling as laid 
down in general monograph of "Viral Vaccines". 
6. Storage and expiry date —The vaccine is expected to retain its potency 
for 12 months if stored at minus 15°C to minus 20°C and for three months at 
2°C to 4°C. 
SHEEP POX VACCINE (INACTIVATED) 
1. Synonym— Formal gel sheep pox vaccine. 
2. Definition—Sheep pox vaccine is a formaline inactivated gel treated 
tissue vaccine. 
3. Preparation.—Healthy susceptible sheep of 8 -12 months of age are 
inoculated subcut aneously with 500 ml. of the 1:100 dilution of the Russian 
Virulent Sheep Pox Virus. Seven to eight day post inoculation skin of the 
abdomen alongwith the oedema is collected. The infected tissues are 
homogenised in 10 per cent concentration in phosphate b uffer (ph 7.4 -7.6) 
which after the extraction of the virus in mixed with sterile gel and buffer in 
following proportion:— 
6 per cent aluminium hydroxide gel—50 per cent. 
Phosphate Buffer (pH 7.6)—35 per cent. 
10 per cent suspension—15 per cent. 
This is later formalised and kept at 20-25°C/10°C for varying periods. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—It is a greyish white suspension. During storage the 
gel settles at the bottom, upper layer of the suspension is clear. 
(b) Identification—The product afford s protection to sheep against 
sheep pox. 
(c) Safety test—This is carried out by inoculating 2 white mice with 0.2 
ml., one guinea pig with 1.0 ml and one rabbit with 3.0 ml. of vaccine. 
The animals should remain clinically healthy for 10 days. 
(d) Sterility test—This is done by seeding the vaccine on usual bacterial 
media. The plates and tubes are incubated for 10 days at 37°C. If the 
pathogenic bacteria are found, the vaccine is rejected while with non -
pathogenic bacteria the vaccine is passed for field use. 
(e) Potency test—This is done by inoculating 4 non-immune susceptible 
sheep preferably exotic breed of 1 -2 years with 3 ml. of vaccine in the 
thigh, subcutaneously. 
The vaccinated sheep are challenged 15 days after inoculation 
alongwith 3 contr ols each with 0.1 ml. of virulent virus containing 200 
infective doses intradermally under the tail. The sheep are observed for 
10 days and their skin reaction recorded. The vaccine is considered potent 
if all the vaccinated, sheep do not show thermal or l ocal skin reaction. 
Vaccine is also potent if 3 vaccinated animals do not develop any reaction 
and one shows abortive skin reaction, while at least 2 of the 3 controls 
develop typical sheep pox reaction at the site of inoculation. 
5. labelling—Shall comply with the requirement of labelling as laid down 
in general moncgraph of "Viral Vaccines". 
6. Storage —The vaccine shall be stored at 4°C to 5°C. It keeps well at 
above temperature upto 12 months. 
SHEEP POX VACCINE (LIVING CELL CULTURE) 
1. Synonym— Sheep Pox vaccine (Living), attenuated sheep pox vaccine. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. Definition—Sheep pox vaccine is freeze dried preparation prepared by 
growing attenuated sheep pox virus is lamb kidney/testicular cell cultures. 
3. Preparation—Primary cell cultures prepar ed from kidney/testicles of 
disease free lambs are used. The mono layers infected with the seed virus are 
incubated at 37°C. The cultures are harvested by 3 cycles of freezing and 
thawing 6 to 7 days post infection when more than 80 per cent cells show C.P.E. 
The suspension is centrifuged at 1000 r.p.m. for 10 minutes to remove cellular 
debris before being stored at minus 20°C. The suspension is freeze dried after 
addition of 5 per cent Lactalbumin hydrolysate and 10 per cent sucrose. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—Light yellow colour. 
(b) Identification—The product affords protection to sheep against 
sheep pox. 
(c) Moisture contents—The moisture contents should not exceed 1.00 
per cent. 
(d) Safety test:— 
(i) Six mice, 3 guinea pigs and 3 ra bbits are inoculated with 0.2 
ml. intraperitoneally 0.5 ml. and 1.0 ml. subcutaneously, 
respectively containing 10 field doses of the vaccine. The 
inoculated animals during the observation period of 10 days should 
remain normal. 
(ii) One hundred field d oses of the vaccine are inoculated 
subcutaneously into each of 2 susceptible sheep in postaxillary 
region. Inoculated animals shall not develop more than a local 
reaction of 2 to 3 cms. 
(e) Sterility test —Shall comply with the test for sterility as desc ribed 
under the general monograph on 'Viral Vaccines". 
(f) Titration in cell culture. —Four randomly selected samples 
reconstituted in a maintenance medium are inoculated in lamb kidney cell 
cultures using 5 tubes for each dilution. The titrations shall be repeated 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
thrice. The TCID 50 to be calculated by Reed and Muench Method. One 
thousand TCID50 is calculated as one field dose. 
(g) Potency test —Three susceptible sheep 8 -10 mo nths old are 
inoculated with 1/10th, field dose and 3 susceptible sheep with one field 
dose, subcutaneously. Three in contact controls are also kept with the 
inoculated sheep. These animals are observed for a period of 14 days and 
their temperature is recorded daily. The vaccinated animals should not 
show any thermal; local or gene ralized reactions. Twenty one days post -
infection the vaccinated and controls are challenged with 10,000 ID 50 of 
virulent sheep pox virus by intradermal route. The temperature of these 
sheep are recorded for a period of 14 days. The vaccinated sheep should 
not develop localised or generalised reaction while control sheep should 
develop high fever, localised reaction or even generalised reaction in 
some cases. 
5. Labelling—Shall comply with the requirement of labelling as laid down 
in general monograph of "Viral Vaccines". 
6. Storage and expiry date—The vaccine is expected to retain its potency 
for 12 months if stored at minus 15°C to minus 20°C and for three months at 
2°C to 4°C. 
TISSUE CULTURE RINDERPEST VACCINE 
1. Synonym— Cell Culture Rinderpest Vaccine. 
2. Definition—Tissue Culture Rinderpest Vaccine is a freeze dried 
preparation of live modified rinderpest virus adapted to and propagated in cell 
culture. 
3. Preparations—Primary or secondary monolayer cultures of the kidney 
cells (Bovine or any other suitable animals) taken from kidney from healthy 
animals free from any pathological changes shall be used. When secondary 
cultures are used they shall have retained their original morphology and 
Karyotype. Kabete 'O' strain of Rinderpest virus d eveloped by East African 
Veterinary Research Organisation (Plowrights strain between the passage levels 
of 99th and 100th passages) shall be used. The virus harvested from cell 
monolayer culture prepared from the kidneys of a single calf or serially 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
cultivated bovine kidney cells (Not more than 10 passages away from the 
Primary) inoculated with the same seed and harvested together, will be freeze 
dried with stabilisers in suitable quantities. 
4. Standards—It complies with the requirements of general stan dards of 
viral vaccine: 
(a) Description—Dry light yellow coloured flakes readily soluble in 
chilled saline or buffered saline. 
(b) Identifications—(i) Protects cattle against a subsequent challenge with 
virulent or caprinised rinderpest virus. 
(ii) It is titrable in tissue culture systems capable of supporting 
the multiplication of this virus. The test shall be made on at least 
three separate occasions using a cell culture derived from different 
animals. 
(iii) Specificity test shall be performed using an appropriate 
serum neutralisation test. 
(c)Sterility test—Each batch shall be tested for bacterial and mycotic 
sterility as given in the general monograph on "Viral Vaccines". 
(d) Innocuity test—Shall be made on each batch in at least two guinea p igs 
and six mice. These animals shall be observed for atleast two weeks for any 
untoward reaction. 
(e)Safety and efficacy test —The test for safety and efficacy shall be 
performed using the pooled reconstituted contents of not less than 4 
ampoules taken at random. The vaccine shall be injected subcutaneously 
into each of at least two susceptible cattle free from specific antibodies 
using the quantity containing not less than 100 field doses and two further 
cattle and using l/10th of a field dose (calculated on the basis of 1000 
TCID50 as one field dose). The animals shall be housed with at least two 
unvaccinated animals and observed for a period of three weeks. The vaccine 
passes the safety test if the cattle show no signs of unusual clinical 
reactions. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
At the end of three weeks all the four animals will be challenged alongwith 
two incontact cattle with a challenge dose of not less than 10 4 ACID50 of 
virulent Rinderpest virus. The vaccine passes the potency/efficacy test if the 
in contact animals develop rinderpest and all the vaccinated animals remains 
normal. 
5. Labelling—Shall comply with general monograph on "Viral 
Vaccines". Each ampoule or at least 50 per cent ampoules in a lot shall contain 
at least following print: 
(i) TCRP Vaccine. 
(ii) Batch No. with year 
(iii) General instructions for use. 
6. Storage—The vaccine when stored at minus 20°C and plus 4°C will 
maintain its titre for 2 years and 6 months respectively. 
CANINE DISTEMPER VACCINE 
1. Synonym—Canine Distemper Vaccine (Living)—Freeze dried. 
2. Definition—It is freeze dried preparation of either tissues from chick 
embryo containing egg adapted strain of canine distemper virus or the cell 
culture in which modified virus has been cultivated. 
3. Preparation—Canine distemper vacc ine shall be prepared from virus 
bearing cell culture, fluid or infected chorioallantoic membrane. Only stock 
seed virus which has been established as pure, safe and immunogenic shall be 
used for the preparation of vaccine Stock seed virus propagated in ch icken 
embryo shall be tested for pathogen by chicken embryo test. One volume of the 
virus shall be mixed with 9 volumes of specific sterile heat inactivated serum to 
neutralise the virus. Mixture shall be inoculated into twenty (9 to 11 days old) 
chicken e mbryo (with 0.1 ml. on CAM and 0.1 ml in alantoic sac). 
Embryonated eggs shall be candled for 7 days daily. Deaths occurring in the 
first 24 hours shall be discarded. CAMS of embryos which die after 24 hours 
shall be examined. When necessary embryo sub -culture shall be made to 
determine the cause of death. The test should be concluded on the 7th day cost 
inoculation. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
The surviving embryos and their CAMS are examined. If deaths or 
abnormality due to the inoculum occur, the seed virus is unsatisfactory. 
Immunogenicity test—Thirteen susceptible dogs 8 -14 weeks old, shall be 
used for the test (ten vaccinates and 3 controls). Blood samples are drawn from 
these animals and individual sample is tested for antibodies against canine 
distemper. The dogs shall be injected with a predetermined quantity of the virus 
and remaining 3 dogs are used as unvaccinated controls. The dose shall be 
based on the virus titration. At least 21 days post infection the vaccinated and 
controls shall be challenged intramuscularly with the same dose of virulent 
canine distemper virus and the animals observed each day for 21 days. At least 
2 out of 3 controls should die and survivor should show the symptoms typical of 
canine distemper. At least 9 out of 10 vaccinated animals should survive an d 
should not show any clinical signs of canine distemper during the observation 
period. The stock seed virus should be tested for immunogenicity at least once 
in 5 years, if maintained under suitable conditions of storage. Eight days old 
chicken embryos fr om a healthy flock are inoculated on their chorioallantoic 
membrane with bacteriologically sterile virus suspension of egg adapted strain. 
After incubation for a period of five days, infected membrane and embryos are 
harvested. The individual embryo is tes ted for bacterial sterility. Those free 
from bacterial contamination are made into a 20 per cent suspension in a 
suitable medium. The suspension is distributed in a single dose quantity into the 
ampoules or vials and freeze dried. 
The ampoules are sealed u nder vacuum or with pure dry sterile nitrogen 
before sealing. Alternatively, the virus may be grown on the suitable cell 
culture. Cells along with the suspending fluid is harvested, distributed in single 
dose quantity in ampoules and freeze dried. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—It is a dry product, pinkish cream material, readily 
dispersible in water or a suitable solvent. 
(b) Identification—It infects CAM of fertile eggs. This is neutralised by 
canine distemper antiserum. It does not cause distempe r after injection 
into susceptible ferrets or dogs but immunizes them against the disease. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(c) Moisture content—Moisture content in the finished product shall not 
exceed more than 1.0 per cent. 
(d) Sterility test—Shall comply with the test for steril ity as described in 
the general monograph on "Viral Vaccines". 
(e) Safety test —(i) Mice safety test : Reconstituted vaccine as 
recommended on the label shall be tested. 
Eight mice, 4 weeks old shall be inoculated intracerebrally with 
0.03 ml. and 8 mice shall be inoculated intraperitoneally with 0.5 
ml. Both groups shall be observed for 7 days, if unfavourable 
reaction attributable to the product in either 2 or more mice in 
either group is observed during observation period, the batch is 
unsatisfactory. 
(ii) Dog Safety test —Inject two healthy dogs, eight to fourteen 
weeks old that have previously been shown to be free from 
distemper virus-neutralising antibodies by the recommended route 
with twice the dose stated on the label and observe for 21 days. No 
significant local or general reaction develops. 
(i) Potency test— (i) Titration : Final samples of finished product 
shall be tested for virus titre, and when tested at any time within 
the expiry period, it should contain not less than 103 ID50 per dose. 
(ii) It shall be carried out in dogs. Two healthy susceptible dogs 
each of 8 -14 weeks of age free from distemper neutralising 
antibodies are injected subcutaneously each with one vaccinating 
dose. Serum samples shall be collected from each dog 14 days after 
vaccination and these shall have specific neutralizing antibodies at 
a dilution of 1:100. 
5. Labelling—Shall comply with the requirements of labelling as laid 
down in the general monograph on "Viral Vaccines". 
6. Storage and expiry date —For the freeze dried product the expiry date 
is one year when stored at minus 20°C. 
AVIAN INFECTIOUS BRONCHITIS VACCINE (LIVING) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1. Synonym—Avian Infectious Bronchitis Vaccine (Living) freeze dried. 
2. Definition—It is freeze dried product of low viruent Avi an Infectious 
Bronchitis Virus grown in embryonated hen's eggs of cultivated in cell culture. 
3. Preparation—Only stock seed virus which has been established as pure, 
safe and immunogenic shall be used. Each lot of stock seed virus shall be tested 
for other pathogens by chicken embryo inoculation tests as follows:— 
A lot of seed virus shall be mixed with 9 volumes of sterile, heat -inactivated 
specific antiserum to neutralise and the vaccine virus serum mixture shall be 
inoculated into each of at least 20 fully susceptible chicken embryos of 9 -11 
days old (0.1 ml. on CAM and 0.1 ml. in the allantoic sac). Eggs are candled 
daily for 7 days. Death occurring during first 24 hours shall be discarded but at 
least 18 viable embryos shall survive 24 hours post in oculation for a valid test. 
All embryo and CAMS from embryos shall be examined which die after 24 
hours. If necessary embryo subcultures shall be made to determine the cause of 
death. The test shall be concluded on the 7th day post inoculation and survivin g 
embryos including the CAM shall be examined. If death or abnormality to the 
stock seed virus occur, the seed lot is unsatisfactory. 
Each lot of stock seed virus shall be tested for immunogenicity as below:— 
Bronchitis susceptible chickens of the same age and source shall be used. For 
each method of administration recommended on the label and for each serotype 
against which protection is claimed, 20 chicks shall be used as vaccinates. Ten 
additional chickens for each serotype against which protection is cl aimed shall 
be held as unvaccinated controls. 21 to 28 days post vaccination all vaccinates 
and controls shall be challenged by eye drops with virulent Bronchitis virus. A 
separate set of vaccinates and controls shall be used for each serotype against 
which protection is claimed. The challenge virus shall have a titre of at least 
104.6 EID50 per ml. Trachea swabs shall be taken once 5 days post challenge 
from each vaccinates and controls. Each swab shall be placed in test tube 
containing 3 ml. of tryptose p hosphate broth and antibiotics. The tubes and 
swabs shall be swirled thoroughly and stored at minus 40°C pending egg 
inoculation. For each chicken swabs at least 5 chicken embryos, 9 -11 days old 
shall be inoculated in the allantoic cavity with 0.2 ml. of b roth from each tube. 
All the embroys surviving 3rd day post inoculation shall be used in evaluation. 
A tracheal swab shall be positive for virus recovery when any of the embryos 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
show typical infectious bronchitis virus lesions such as stunting, curling, ki dney 
urates, clubbed down or death during 4-7 days post inoculation period. 
Ninety per cent of the controls should prove positive for virus recovery. If 
less than 90 per cent of the controls are negative for virus recovery, the stock 
seed is unsatisfactory. The stock seed virus should be tested for immunogenicity 
once in 5 years provided it is maintained under standard conditions of the 
bronchitis virus storage. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description— It is greyish -white product easily dispersible in the 
diluent. 
(b) Identification— 
(i) The contents of the ampoule are suspended as per the 
instructions for the field use. The 0.2 ml. of the suspension shall be 
inoculated in the allantoic cavity of 9 -11 days old chicken embryo 
and are incubated for 7 days. The leisons typical of infectious 
bronchitis shall be observed in the embryos at the end of incubation 
period. The allantoic fluid shall not agglutinate the chicken RBC's. 
(ii) Specific antisera against avian infectious bronchitis virus 
should neutralise the vaccine virus. 
(c) Moisture content—Moisture content in the finished product should 
not exceed 1.0 per cent. 
(d) Sterility test—Complies with the test for sterility as described under 
the general monograph on "Viral Vaccines". 
(e) Safety test —Ten h ealthy susceptible chickens 5 -10 days old from 
the same source, batch shall be vaccinated with ten field doses of the 
vaccine and alongwith five chicks from same batch as unvaccinated 
controls by the prescribed route and observed 7 or 21 days post 
vaccination. Neither severe respiratory symptoms nor death shall occur to 
more than one experimental chicks. None of the unvaccinated control 
shall show any clinical symptoms. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(f) Potency test —The minimum virus content of the freeze dried 
product shall be not less than 103.5 EID 50 per bird. The virus content of 
the vaccine shall be titrated as below:— 
Serial ten fold dilution of the freeze dried material will be made in 
typetose phosphate broth. Three to five embryonated eggs (9-11 days old) 
shall be inoculated with 0.1 ml. of each dilution into the allantoic cavity 
and observed daily for 7 days. 
Deaths occurring during the first 24 hours shall be discarded. The 
surviving embryos are examined for the evidence of infection and EID50 
shall be calculated by the Re ed and Muench Method/Spearman and 
Karber method. 
5. Labelling—Shall comply with the requirements of labelling as laid 
down in the general monograph on "Viral Vaccines". 
6. Storage and expiry date—Can be stored at 4°C for six months.] 
PART II 
 ANTISERA 
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE PRODUCTION OF ALL SERA 
FROM LIVING ANIMALS 
1. Definitions—(i) This part of the Schedule applies to anti -bacterial sera, 
antiviral sera and anti -toxic sera which are prepared by injecting bacteria or 
viruses or their products into buffalo -bulls or other suitable animals so as to 
produce active immunity which is manifested by the formation of anti-body. 
(ii) For the purpose of this part of the Schedule an antiserum means sterile 
liquid antiserum concentrated and unconcentrated, solutions of globulins or 
their derivatives or solid forms which can be reconstituted when necessary. 
2. Staff of Establishment—The establishment shall be under the direction 
and control of a competent expert in bacteriology and serology with adequate 
training in immunology and standardisation of biological products and 
knowledge of animal management. He shall be assisted by a staff adequate for 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
carrying out the tests required during the course of preparation of the sera and 
standardisation of the finished products. 
3. Proper Name —The proper name of the antiserum shall be the 
recognised scientific name of the disease or its causative organism or some 
generally recognised abbreviations thereof preceded by the prefix 'anti', and 
followed by the word 'ser um' as for example, 'Anti -anthrax serum'. The proper 
name of any antitoxin may be formed from the word 'Anti -toxin’ preceded by 
the name of the organism from which the toxin was prepared, and followed, if 
desired, by a term indicating the source of the str ain of that organism provided 
where there is no special provision in the Schedule, the name as approved by 
the licensing authority may be adopted. 
4. Records—(1) The permanent records which the licensee is required to 
keep shall include the following particulars:— 
(a) As to the cultures —Evidence of the identity and specificity of the 
cultures. 
(b) As to the procedure used in immunising the animals: 
(i) The method of preparing the cultures or antigen used for 
immunisation. 
(ii) The dosage and method s employed in administering the culture 
or antigen. 
(iii) The period in the course of immunisation at which blood is 
withdrawn for the preparation of the serum. 
(c) Any test which may have been applied to the serum to determine its 
content of specifi c antibodies or its specific therapeutic potency and 
purity. 
(2) If the licensee desired to treat the performance of any tests r ecorded 
under sub -paragraph (i) (c) of this paragraph as determining the date of 
completion of manufacture for the purpose of Rul e 109 he shall submit full 
particulars of the proposed test to the licensing authority and obtain his 
approval. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
5. Cultures—The cultures used in immunising the animals shall be at all 
times open to inspection, and specimens shall be furnished for examin ation at 
the request of the licensing authority. 
6. Quantity—(a) Any antiserum shall be issued for veterinary use in the 
form of either— 
(i) Actual serum, i.e., the liquid product of decantation of the 
coagulated blood or plasma without any addition, other than antiseptic or 
subtraction, or 
(ii) A solution of the purified serum proteins containing the specific 
antibodies. 
(b) At the time of issue, the liquid shall be clear or show at the most a slight 
opalescence or precipitate. Preparations of the natural serum shall not contain 
more than 10 per cent of solid matter. A solution of serum protein shall not 
contain more than 20 per cent of solid matter. 
7. Precautions to be observed in preparation .—(i) Laboratories where 
sera are exposed to the air in the course of the process of preparation 
must be separated by a sufficient distance from stables and animal 
houses to avoid the risk of aerial contamination with bacteria from 
animal excreta, and must be rendered fly -proof to prevent such 
contamination by insects. Such laboratories must have impervious walls 
and floors and must capable of being readily disinfected when 
necessary. 
(ii) A special room with impervious walls must be provided for the 
collection of blood from the living animals. 
(iii) An efficient system of manure removal must be used which will 
prevent its accumulation in the vicinity of any room where blood or 
serum is collected or handled. 
(iv) An adequate number of sterilizers must be provided for the 
sterilization of all glasswar e or other apparatus with which the serum 
may come into contact in the course of its preparation. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(v) All processes to which the serum is subjected during and after the 
collection from the animals, must be designed to preserve its sterility, 
but in the case of an artificially concentrated sera it shall suffice that the 
process of concentration is conducted with scrupulous cleanliness and in 
such a manner as to avoid unnecessary dangerous contamination. 
(vi) The laboratories in which the testing of ser a for potency, sterility 
and freedom from abnormal toxicity are carried out must be adequate 
for the purpose. An adequate supply of animals for use in such tests and 
suitable housing for such animals must be provided. 
(vii) Provision must be made for co mplying with any special 
conditions which may be laid down in the Schedule relating to the 
production and issue of the particular serum, in respect of which the 
licence is granted. 
8. Unhealthy or Infected Animals —If an animal used in the production 
of sera is found to be suffering from an infection except one produced by living 
organisms against which it is being immunized, or shows sign of serious or 
persistent ill health not reasonably attributable to the process of immunisation, 
the licensee shall im mediately report the matter to the licensing authority and 
shall, if the authority orders an inspection and the Inspector so directs, cause 
such animal to be killed and a post mortem examination of it to be made, and 
take steps to prevent any serum obtaine d from the animal being sold or offered 
for sale until permission is given by the licensing authority. If the result of the 
post-mortem is such as to bring under suspicion, the health of any of the other 
animals used for the production of sera, the licensi ng authority may prohibit the 
use of those animals for the production of sera or may take such other steps as 
may be necessary to prevent the issue of sera which may be dangerous to animal 
health: 
Provided in the case of emergency, the person is charge of the establishment 
may order the destruction of an animal used in the production of sera and 
suspected of infection, and shall in that case give notice forthwith to the 
licensing authority and shall permit an Inspector to be present at the post 
mortem examination. 
9. Conditions and Housing of Animals —(i) The animals used in the 
production of sera should be adequately housed under hygienic environments. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(ii) Only healthy animals free from disease should be used in the 
preparation of sera. 
(iii) Every animal intended to be used as the source of serum must be 
subjected to a period of observation in quarantine for at least seven days 
before being admitted to the animal sheds in which the serum -yielding 
animals are housed. 
(iv) In case of horses and ot her equidae, every animal used as source 
of serum shall either be actively immunized against tetanus or shall be 
passively immunized against the disease by injection of tetanus antitoxin in 
such doses as to ensure the constant presence of that antitoxin in the blood 
during the whole period of the use of the animal as a source of serum. 
ANTI-SERA AND THEIR GENERAL STANDARD 
Anti-sera contain the immune substances that have a specific prophylactic or 
therapeutic action when injected into animals exposed to or suffering from a 
disease due to specific micro -organism or its toxin. Anti -sera are classified into 
three groups: 
(i) Antitoxic sera (Antitoxin) 
(ii) Antibacterial sera. 
(iii) Antiviral sera. 

Anti-sera are usually issued in an unconcentrated form for animal use but 
may be concentrated and also freeze dried. However, for the purpose of the 
Schedule the word 'anti-sera is also used for the unconcentrated liquid sera only. 
A suitable bacteriostatic agent in a concentration sufficient to prevent the 
growth of micro-organisms is added to the liquid serum. 

GENERAL STANDARD 
1. Description—Liquid native or unconcentrated anti -sera are yellow or 
yellowish brown in colour. They are initially transparent but may become ttirbid 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
with age. They are almost o dourless except for the odour of any bacteriostatic 
agent that may have been added. 
2. Identification—The test for identity is described in the individual 
monograph. 
3. Acidity or Alkalinity—All native anti-sera have a pH of 7.0 to 8.5. 
4. Abnormal Toxicity—All anti-sera shall comply with the following test 
for freedom from abnormal toxicity:— 
(a) Two healthy mice each weighing not less than 18 g. are injected 
subcutaneously each with 0.5 ml. of the sample and observed for five 
days. None of the mice should show any abnormal reaction or die. 
(b) Two healthy guinea pigs each weighing 300 g. to 450 g. are injected 
subcutaneously each with 5 ml. of the sample and observed for seven 
days. None of the guinea pigs should show any abnormal reaction or die. 
5. Sterility—All anti -sera shall comply with the tests for sterility 
described in Rules 115 to 119. 
6. Potency—The potency of each preparation, when the available methods 
permit, is determined by the appropriate biological assay, and it is des cribed 
under the individual monograph. 
7. Total Solids—Native anti-sera should not contain more than 10 per cent 
solid matter. 
8. Labelling—Should comply with the provisions for 'Labelling' as laid 
down for 'Bacterial Vaccines'. 
9. Storage—Liquid preparations of anti -sera shall be stored, protected 
from light at temperature between 2°C to 4°C and shall not be frozen. 
10. Date of Manufacture —The date of manufacture shall be unless 
otherwise specified in the individual monograph in this part as de fined in clause 
(b) of sub-rule (3) of Rule 109. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
11. Containers—All anti-sera are distributed in sterilised containers of a 
material which is inert towards the substance and which are sealed to exclude 
micro-organisms. 
12. Expiry Date—The expiry date of potency of all sera shall not be more 
than twenty-four months after the date of manufacture. 
ANTI-ANTHRAX SERUM 
1. Synonym—Bacillus Anthracis Anti-serum. 
2. Definition—Anti-axthrax serum is the serum of animals that confers a 
specific protection against Bacillus anthracis. 
3. Preparation—The anti -serum may be prepared in buffalo bulls after 
repeated injections of cultures of B. Anthracis of a virulent strain. 
4. Standard—It complies with the requirements in the general provisions 
for anti -sera under Description, Acidity or Alkalinity, Abnormal Toxicity, 
Sterility Solids, Labelling, Storage and Expiry date. 
Identification—It protects animals against infection with B. Anthracis. 
ANTI-BLACKQUARTER SERUM 
1. Synonym—Blackleg Anti-serum, Clostridium Chauvoei-Anti-serum. 
2. Definition—Anti-Blackquarter serum is the serum of suitable animals 
containing the substances that have a specific neutralising effect on Clostridium 
Chauvoei. 
3. Preparation—It is prepared by injecting subcutaneously or 
intramuscularly increasing dose of formolised cultures of Cl. Chauvoei into 
buffalo-bulls. 
4. Standard—It complies with the requirements described in the general 
provisions for anti -sera under Description, Acidity or Alkalinity, Abnormal 
toxicity, Sterility, Solids, Labelling, Storage and Expiry date. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Identification—It protects susceptible animals against infection with virulent 
strains of Cl. Chauvoei. 
ANTI-FOWL-CHOLERA SERUM 
1. Synonym—Pasteurella Septica Anti-serum (Avian). 
2. Definition—Fowl Chol era Anti -serum is the serum of animals 
containing the substances that confer a specific protection to fowls against 
virulent strain of Pasteurella Septica (Avian). 
3. Preparation—Anti-serum is prepared from buffalo-bulls after they have 
been subjected to an injection of killed cultures of virulent strain of Pasteurella 
Septica (Avian) followed by injections of living cultures of the same organism. 
4. Standard—It complies with the requirements described in the general 
provision for anti -sera under Desc ription, Acidity or Alkalinity, Abnormal 
toxicity, Sterility, Solids, Labelling, Storage and Expiry Date. 
Identification—It protects susceptible fowls against infection with 
Pasteurella Septica (Avian) and its homologous strains. 
ANTI-HAEMORRHAGIC SEPTICAEMIA SERUM 
1. Synonym—Pasteurella Septica Antiserum. 
2. Definition—Anti-Haemorrhagic Septicaemia Serum is the serum of 
animals containing the substances that confer a specific protection to susceptible 
animals against virulent strains of Pasteurella Septica. 
3. Preparation—The anti-serum is prepared from buffalo -bulls after they 
have been subjected to repeated injections of formolised cultures of standard 
strain Pasteurella Septica with adjuvants, followed by suitable doses of virulent 
culture of the organism. 
4. Standard—It complies with the requirements described in the general 
provisions for anti -serum under Description, Acidity or Alkalinity, Abnormal 
toxicity, Sterility, Solids, Labelling, Storage and Expiry date. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Identification—It protects s usceptible animals against infection with 
homologous strains of Pasteurella Septica. 
ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM 
1. Synonym—Cattle Plague Anti-serum. 
2. Definition—Anti-rinderpest serum is the serum of buffalo -bulls 
containing the substances that confer a specific immunity to susceptible animals 
against virulent strains of the virus of rinderpest. 
3. Preparation—The anti -serum is prepared from buffaloes who have 
reacted to a dose of virulent rinderpest virus, which is injected simultaneously 
with a prede termined quantify of anti -rinderpest serum so as to control the 
severity of the reaction (serum-simultaneous-method). 
4. Standard—It complies with the requirements described in the general 
provisions for anti -sera under Description, Acidity or Alkalinit y, Abnormal 
toxicity, Solids, Labelling, Storage and Expiry date. 
(i) Identification—It protects susceptible animals against rinderpest. 
(ii) Potency—Five buffalo -calves of about one year of age in good 
condition are used for the test. Three are inje cted subcutaneously with the anti -
rinderpest serum under test at the rate of 10 ml. per 46 kg. body weight, subject 
to a minimum of 20 ml. per animal. These together with the two remaining, are 
simultaneously injected subcutaneously at a different site with 1 ml. of a 1 : 100 
dilution of spleen suspension of virulent bull-virus. 
The animals should be observed for fourteen days during which time the 
serum treated animals should exhibit no symptoms of rinderpest other than rise 
in temperature and slight intes tinal disturbances, while the controls develop 
more severe symptoms or die. 

SALMONELLA PULLORUM ANTI-SERUM 
1. Synonym—Salmonella Pullorum Anti-serum. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. Definition—Salmonella Pullorum anti-serum is the sera from fowls and 
contains antibodies against Salmonella Pullorum. It is used for standardizing 
batches of Salmonella Pullorum antigens and also used as a control along with 
the sera suspected for pullorum disease. 
3. Preparation—The serum is prepared after intravenous inoculation with 
smooth culture suspension of Salmonella Pullorum in healthy birds. 
4. Standard—It complies with the requirements in the general provisions 
for antisera under Description, Acidity, Alkalinity, Sterility, Solids, Labelling, 
Storage and Expiry Date. 
Identification—It should give positive agglutination with Salmonella pullorum 
antigen. 
STANDARD ANTI-BRUCELLA ABORTUS SERUM 
1. Synonym—National counterpart of standard anti -Brucella abortus 
serum. 
2. Definition—Standard anti -Brucella abortus serum is the serum which 
contains 1000 International Units (I.U.) per ml. and is used for standardizing 
batches of brucella antigens and is also used as a control along with the sera 
suspected for burcellosis. 
3. Preparation—The serum is prepared after intravenous inoculation o f 
suspension of smooth culture of B. abortus (strain 99) in rabbits or cattle and 
subsequently diluting it suitably with brucella -free healthy serum such that 
when tested with standardized Brucella abortus tube test antigen, it gives 50% 
agglutination at 1/500 final serum dilution. 
4. Standard—It complies with the requirements in the general provision 
for anti-sera under Description, Acidity, Alkalinity, Sterility, Solids, Labelling, 
Storage and Expiry date. 
Identification—It should give agglutination with Brucella antigen. 
PART III 
DIAGNOSTIC ANTIGENS 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE MANUFACTURE AND 
STANDARDISATION OF DIAGNOSTIC AGENTS (BACTERIAL ORIGIN) 
1. Definition—This part of the Schedule applies to reagents of bacterial 
origin employed for various tests. 
2. Staff of Establishment —A competent expert in bacteriology with 
sufficient experience in the manufacture and standardisation of veterinary 
biological products shall be in charge of the establishment responsible for the 
production of various dia gnostic agents of bacterial origin and he may be 
assisted by a staff adequate for carrying out the tests required during the 
preparation and standardisation of various diagnostic agents. 
3. Proper Name—The proper name of any diagnostic agent is the name 
of microorganism from which it is made, followed by the word 'antigen' unless 
the Schedule otherwise provides, or, it may be derived from the name of the 
organism responsible for the causation of the disease or if there is no special 
provision in the Schedule, the name approved by the Licensing Authority. In the 
case of the undermentioned preparations the proper name of the diagnostic 
agent may be as follows:— 
1. Abortus Bang Ring (A.B.R.) Antigen. 
2. Brucella Abortus Coloured Antigen. 
3. Brucella Abortus Plain Antigen. 
4. Johnin. 
5. Mallein. 
6. Salmonella Abortus Equi "H" Antigen. 
7. Salmonella Pullorum Coloured Antigen. 
8. Salmonella Pullorum Plain Antigen. 
9. Tuberculin. 

4. Records—Culture used in the preparation of diagnos tic agents of 
bacterial origin must, before being manipulated into an agent be thoroughly 
tested for identity by the generally accepted tests applicable to the particular 
micro-organism. The permanent -record which the licensee is required to keep 
shall amongst other include a record of the origin, properties and characteristics 
of the cultures. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
5. Preparation—Diagnostic agents of bacterial origin are prepared from 
selected cultures after their careful examination for the identity, specificity, 
purity and antigenicity'. They may be prepared in the following manner:— 
(a) Formolised antigens —The selected pure culture strain grown in a 
suitable medium at an optimum temperature for an appropriate period. The 
pure growth is then exposed to the action of a so lution of Formaldehyde 
I.P. in a suitable concentration and at an appropriate temperature for a 
suitable period. 
(b) In some cases, the diagnostic agents are prepared by growing the 
organisms on suitable media and then deriving specific protein constituents 
for the bacteria by various methods. 
6. General Standards— 
(a) Description—Diagnostic agents may be clear opalescent or coloured 
liquids. 
(b) Identification—Some exhibit specific agglutination when mixed 
with the serum of the animals infected with homologous organisms and 
other when injected into the animal body in appropriate doses cause 
specific reactions like hypersensitiveness, local and general reaction, if 
the animal is infected with homologous organism. 
(c) Sterility Test—All antigens shall be tested for sterility in accordance 
with Rules 114 to 119. 
(d) Standardisation—It is carried out either by determining the definite 
cell concentration in the product or by observing the general and local 
reactions in healthy and artificially infected animals with various standard 
dilution of the product. 
7. Labelling—As under general provisions for the bacterial vaccines with 
the addition that it is meant for diagnostic purposes only. 
8. Storage—All antigens are stored, protected from lig ht at a temperature 
between 2°C to 4°C. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
9. Date of Manufacture —The date of manufacture shall be unless 
otherwise specified in the individual monograph in this part as defined in clause 
(b) of sub-rule(3) of rule 109. 
ABORTUS BANG RING (ABR.) ANTIGEN 
1. Synonym—Milk Ring Test Antigen. 
2. Definition—The antigen is a suspension of pure growth culture of 
standard strain of Brucella abortus strain 99 strained supravitally with 2, 3, 5, 
triphenyl tetrazolium chloride suspended in 0.85 per cent saline containing 1 per 
cent glycerol and 1 per cent phenol. 
3. Preparation—Smooth strain of Brucella abortus strain 99 is grown on 
potato infusion agar for 48 to 72 hours in Roux flasks, at 37°C. Condensation 
fluid if any is pipetted off before washing. Each fla sk is washed with about 20 
ml. of normal saline. The pooled washing is filtered through a gauze and the 
filtrate is collected in a measuring cylinder. To every 500 ml. of the filtrate lg. 
of 2, 3, 5, triphenyl tetrazolium chloride is added immediately. The container is 
shaken for thirty minutes till the tetrazolium salt is dissolved. The product is 
taken out and kept in at 37°C for two hours. After incubation the product is 
heated at 65°C in a water bath for thirty minutes. It is cooled and centrifuged at 
3000 r.p.m for one hour. The supernatant is pipetted off and sediment is 
suspended in normal saline containing 1 per cent glycerol and 1 per cent phenol 
and filtered through sterile cotton wool. This forms concentrated antigen. 
STANDARDIZATION OF THE STRAINED ANTIGEN 
An aliquot portion of the microbial suspension stained with 
phenyltetrazolium is taken, representing the initial undiluted suspension. 1 ml. 
per tube of this initial undiluted stained suspension is added to six test tubes, 
followed by increasing quantities of the glycerolphenol diluent as follows:— 
Tube Undiluted Stained Suspension Diluent 
1 1 0.6 
2 1 0.8 
3 1 1.0 
4 1 1.2 
5 1 1.4 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6 1 1.6 

The contents of each tube are then diluted tenfold with the same diluent and 
serve as antigen for a tub e agglutination test with the Standard Serum (or its 
national counterpart). In this way, six seroreactions will be carried out. During 
this procedure, the concentrated strained microbial suspension should be kept in 
the refrigerator at 4°C. 
The agglutinati on reactions are read after forty -eight hours at the 
agglutination titre of the Standard Serum, previously determined with the usual 
unstained antigen in the test tube, corresponds to the correct dilution of the 
standard antigen. 
The next step, therefore, is to dilute the concentrated stained suspension to 
the same extent as the tube whose tenfold dilution has given the correct 
agglutination titre i.e., the concentration of antigen in the tube before the tenfold 
dilution had been made. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—It is red colour liquid containing dead bacteria in 
suspension. 
(b) Identification—It shows formation of a specific cherry red coloured 
ring in the cream layer when mixed with pooled samples of milk taken 
from animals suffering from brucellosis. 
(c) Sterility Test—Should comply with the tests for sterility described in 
the general monograph of 'Diagnostic Antigen'. The tests shall, however, 
be done before colouring. 
5. Labelling and Storage —Should comply with the requirements of 
'Labelling' and 'Storage' as laid down in the general monograph of 'Diagnostic 
Antigen'. 
6. Expiry Date—The date of expiry of potency shall be not more than nine 
months from the date of manufacture when stored at 2°C to 4°C. 
BRUCELLA ABORTUS COLOURED ANTIGEN 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1. Synonym—Brucella Abortus Cotten Strain 99 coloured Antigen. 
2. Definition—Brucella Abortus coloured Antigen is a suspension of pure 
smooth cultures of Brucella abortus strain 99 in phenolised glycerine saline, the 
bacteria being coloured by the addition of crystal violet and brilliant green. This 
antigen is used for plate test for serological diagnosis of brucella infection. 
3. Preparation—Seventy-two hours old growth of Brucella Abortus strain 
ninety-nine in smooth form on potato infusion aga r medium in Roux flasks is 
washed with phenolised glycerine saline (containing 12 per cent sodium 
chloride, 20 per cent glycerine and 0.5 per cent phenol.). The washed growth is 
filtered through a pad of absorbent cotton wool and the suspension is coloured 
by the addition of 1 ml. each of 1 per cent aqueous solution of crystal violet and 
brilliant green for every 250 ml. of the suspension. The product is heated for 
sixty minutes in a water bath at 60°C before it is standardised. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—It is a greenish violet liquid containing dead bacteria 
in suspension. 
(b) Identification—It gives specific agglutination when mixed with the 
serum of the animal infected with brucella organism. 
(c) Sterility Test—Should comply with the tests for sterility described in 
the general monograph on 'Diagnostic Antigen'. 
(d) Standardisation—0.5 ml. of the antigen is mixed with 4.5 ml. of 
normal saline solution in Hopkins graduate tube. The mixture is 
centrifuged at 3000 r.p.m. for sixty minutes a nd the percentage of 
bacterial cells present in the original antigen is assessed by noting the 
height of the cell deposit. The antigen is then standardised so as to 
contain 10 per cent cell deposit. 
5. Labelling and Storage —Should comply with the requireme nts of 
'Labelling' and 'Storage' as laid down in the general monograph of 'Diagnostic 
Antigen'. 
Expiry Date—The date of expiry of potency shall be not more than nine 
months from the date of manufacture when stored at 2°C to 4°C. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
BRUCELLA ABORTUS PLAIN ANTIGEN 
1. Synonym—Brucella Abortus Strain 99 Plain Antigen. 
2. Definition—Brucella Abortus Plain Antigen is a suspension of pure 
smooth cultures of Brucella Abortus Strain 99 in phenol-saline. 
3. Preparation—Seventy-two hours old growth of Brucella A bortus 
Strain 99 in smooth form on potato infusion agar medium in Roux flasks is 
washed with normal saline solution. The washed growth is filtered through a 
pad of absorbent cotton wool and the suspension is kept at 60°C for sixty 
minutes on water bath to kill the organisms. It is then preserved by the addition 
of phenol in a final concentration 0.5 per cent. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—An opalescent liquid containing dead bacteria in 
suspension. 
(b) Identification—It gives specific agglutination when mixed with the 
serum of animals infected with brucella organism. 
(c) Sterility Test—Would comply with the tests for sterility described in 
the general monograph on 'Diagnostic Antigen'. 
(d) Standardisation—Mix the concentrated antigen well and dilute 1 
ml. with 0.5 per cent phenol saline until it corresponds to about tube four 
of Brown's opacity tubes. Further dilutions of the antigen adjusted to 
opacity Tube No. 4 are made. The particular dilution that gives 50 per 
cent agglutination with antib rucella abortus serum (containing 1000 
International Units) at 1 : 500 final serum dilution, is assessed as the 
diluting factor for the concentrated antigen. The bulk of the contracted 
antigens is accordingly diluted for issue as standard antigen. 
5. Labelling and Storage — Should comply with the requirements of 
'Labelling' and 'Storage' as laid down in the general monograph on 'Diagnostic 
Antigen'. 
6. Expiry Date —The date of expiry of potency shall be not more than 
nine months from the date of manufacture when stored at 2°C to 4°C. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
JOHNIN 
1. Definition—The Johnin is a preparation of a fluid n.edium in which 
Mycobacterium para tuberculosis has been grown in artificial culture and which 
has been freed by filtration from the bacilli. 
2. Preparation—Young culture of selected strain of 
Mycoparatuberculosis of bovine origin is grown on synthetic medium and 
incubated at 37°C for ten to twelve weeks. Flasks showing lucurient and pure 
growth are steamed for three hours thereafter kept at room temperature 
overnight. The contents are filtered through fine meshed sieve. The filtrate is 
concentrated over a steam bath to one -tenth of its original volume and kept in 
cold storage for fourteen days before being filtered through Seitz filter. The 
product is dispensed in ampoules and hermetically sealed. 
3. Standards— 
(a) Description—A yellowish brown to brownish liquid. 
(b) Identification—It produces hot, painful and oedematous swelling at 
the site of inoculation in animals infected with Mycoparatuberculosis 
organism. 
(c) Sterility Test.—Should comply with the test for sterility described in 
the general monograph on 'Diagnostic Antigens'. 
(d) Potency Test —Two animals, previously infected with 
Mycoparatuberculosis and two healthy animals are each injected 
intradermaliy in the neck region with 0.1 ml. of the product. Forty eight 
hours later, the injection is repeated at the site. The product should 
produce a typical reaction in the infected animals in the form of a hot 
painful and oedematous swelling at the site of inoculation persisting for at 
least forty eight hours after the second injection. Control animals should 
not show such reaction. 
4. Labelling and Storage — Should comply with the requirements of 
'Labelling' and 'Storage' as laid down in the genera l monograph on 'Diagnostic 
Antigen'. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
5. Expiry Date—The date of expiry of potency shall be not more than two 
years from the date of manufacture when stored at 2°C to 4°C. 
MALLEINS 
1. Definition—(i) Malleins are preparations of fluid media in which th e 
Actinobacillus mellei has been grown in artificial culture and which have been 
freed by filtration from the bacilli. 
(ii) For the purposes of this Schedule malleins are classified into (a) Mallein-
subcutaneous and (b) Mallein intradermopalpebral (I.D.P.). 
2. Preparation— 
(a) Mallein subcutaneous —Three to four weeks old pure growth of 
standard strain of A. mallei grown on synthetic medium is steamed for 
one hour in Koch's steam sterilizer. One part of 5 per cent phenol solution 
is added to every nine part of the dead culture which is then filtered 
through Seitz filter. 
(b) Mallein Concentrated —The procedure is the same as for Mallein 
subcutaneous except, that the filtrate is evaporated in porcelain dish over 
steam to half the original volume before addition of phenol. Five per cent 
phenol solution is added in sufficient quantity to the concentrated 
product, to give a final concentration of 0.5 per cent. 
3. Standards— 
(a) Description—A yellowish to brown viscous liquid. 
(b) Identification—It produces hot tense, painful swelling when injected 
into the animals infected with A. mallei organisms. 
(c) Sterility Test—Should comply with the test for sterility described in 
the general monograph on 'Diagnostic Antigens'. 
(d) Potency Test— 
(i) Mallein-subcutanecus—Two ponies, previously sensitised 
with A. Mallei and controls, are injected each with 1 ml. of the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
product subcutaneously in the neck region. The animals are 
observed for local reaction and rise in temperature. Local reaction 
is manifested by a hot tense, painful swelling becoming prominent 
within twenty-four hours. The rise in temperature is observed by 
recording the body temperature at the time of inoculation and 
subsequently at short intervals. A rise in temperature of 1°C or 
more above normal is indicative of infection. 
(ii) Mallein Intra -dermo-Palpebral—(I.D.P.)—Two ponies 
previously sensitized with A. Mallei and two healthy ponies are 
injected intradermaliy with 0.2 ml. of the product near the rim of 
the lower eye lid of one ey e. Typical reactions such as painful 
swelling of the palpebral tissue with mucopurulent discharge from 
the eye is indicative of infection. The healthy ponies should not 
show such reactions. 
Similar test in other eye is performed with a previously 
determined patient mallein using as a standard. When the local 
reactions produced by intradermo palpebral infections of the two 
preparations are comparable the batch is passed for issue. 
4. Labelling and Storage — Should comply with the requirements of 
'Labelling' and 'Storage' as laid down in the general monograph on 'Diagnostic 
Antigen'. 
5. Expiry Date—The date of expiry of potency shall be not more than two 
years from the date of manufacture when stored at 2°C to 4°C. 
SALMONELLA ABORTUS EQUI 'H' ANTIGEN 
1. Synonym—Equine Abortion Diagnostic Antigen. 
2. Definition—Salmonella Abortus Equi Antigen is suspension of a pure 
smooth culture of actively motile Salmonella Abortus equi in formal saline. 
3. Preparation—Standard stain of S. Abortus Equi is grown on nutrient 
agar in Roux flasks at 37°C for twenty -four hours. The pure growth in Roux 
flasks is washed with normal saline and diluted to contain approximately 800 
million organisms per ml. Solution of Formaldehyde I.P. is added to give a final 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
concentration 0.5 per cent and the formolised product is incubated at 37°C for 
twenty-four hours. The final product is dispensed in suitable containers. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—A slightly opalescent liquid containing dead bacteria 
in suspension. 
(b) Identification—It gives specific agglutination when mixed with the 
serum of the animals infected with S. Abortus Equi organisms. 
(c) Sterility Test—Should comply with the test for sterility described in 
the general monograph on 'Diagnostic Antigens'. 
5. Labelling and Storage — Should comply with the requirements of 
'Labelling' and 'Storage' as laid down in the general monograph on 'Diagnostic 
Antigens'. 
6. Expiry Date —The date of expiry of potency shall be not more than 
nine months from the date of manufacture when stored at 2°C to 4°C. 
SALMONELLA POLLORUM COLOURED ANTIGEN 
1. Synonym—Bacillary White Diarrhoes (B.W.D.) Antigen. 
2. Definition—The antigen is a suspension in a solution containing 1 per 
cent Formaline, 1 per cent KH 2P02 and 0.85 per c ent Sodium Chloride of pure 
smooth culture of a standard strain of Salmonella Pullorum. 
3. Preparation—Standard strain of S. Pullorum is grown on sulphur agar 
medium in Roux flasks for five days at 37°C. The pure growth is washed with 
1.0 per cent Formol Saline. 
Standardisation 
The antigenic cells suspension is then centrifuged (preferably in cold 
centrifuge) for half an hour at 4000 rotations per minute and the packed cell 
volume determined. The packed cell is then resuspended in a solution 
containing 1 per cent formalin, 1 per cent. KH 2P04 and 0.85 per cent sodium 
chloride, 1 ml. of packed cell is suspended in 10 ml. of the resuspendiary 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
solution, mixed thoroughly and is passed through a cotton wool pad. The 
turbidity of the antigenic suspension is usua lly between 100 to 125 times Mac 
Farland scale standard and optimum 3 cc. of a 1 per cent aqueous solution of 
crystal violet are added to 100 ml. of the antigenic suspension. After making the 
dye the antigen is allowed to stand forty -eight hours before use . The average 
yield per Roux flask of culture medium is about 50 ml. The antigen should be 
bottled in 10 ml. or 20 ml. quantity in amber -coloured bottles and corked with 
rubber caps and paraffin sealed and preserved until required for use within the 
expiry period. This antigen reacts instantly with the blood of all carrier birds 
and remains permanently negative with that of non-infected birds. 
This antigen gives good reactions with positive sera whose titre is even as 
low as 1:20. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—Violet coloured liquid containing dead bacteria in 
suspension. 
(b) Identification—It gives specific agglutination when mixed with the 
serum of birds infected with S. Pullorum infection. It is used for carrying 
out plate agglutination test for serological diagnosis for S. Pullorum 
infection in birds. 
(c) Sterility Test—Should comply with the test for sterility described in 
the general monograph of 'Diagnostic Antigens.' The test shall be done 
before addition of 'Crystal violet'. 
5. Labelling and Storage —Should comply with the requirements of 
'Labelling' and 'Storage' as laid down in the general monograph on 'Diagnostic 
Antigens'. 
6. Expiry Date —A six -month expiration date for this antigen is 
recommended. However, it is advisable to use fresh ones as far as possible. This 
antigen should be preserved at 4° to 6° in dark place in the refrigerator and 
should not be exposed to hot weather condition for longer than necessary before 
use in the field. 
SALMONELLA PULLORUM PLAIN ANTIGEN 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1. Synonym—Bacillary White Diarrhoes (B.W.D.) Plain Antigen. 
2. Definition—The antigen is a suspension of pure smooth culture of 
Salmonella Pullorum in phenol saline. 
3. Preparation—Forty eight hours old pure culture of smooth strain of S. 
Pollorum is washed with 0.5 per cent phenol saline and the pooled suspension is 
adjusted to contain approximately 800 million organisms per ml. by the addition 
of more carbon saline. The suspension is kept at room temperature for twenty -
four hours, and dispensed in suitable containers. 
4. Standards— 
(a) Description—An opalescent liquid containing dead bacteria in 
suspension. 
(b) Identification—It gives specific agglutination when mixed with the 
serum of birds infected with S. Pullorum. 
(c) Sterility Test—Should comply with the tests for sterility described in 
the general monograph on 'Diagnostic Antigen.' 
5. Labelling and Storage — Should comply with the requirements of 
'Labelling' and 'Storage' as laid down in the general monograph on 'Diagnostic 
Antigens'. 
6. Expiry Date —The date of expiry of potency shall be not more than 
nine months from the date of manufacture when stored at 2°C to 4°C. 

TUBERCULINE 
(i) Tuberculines are preparations of fluid media on which Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis has been grown in artificial culture and which has been freed by 
filtration from the bacilli. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(ii) For the purposes of the Schedule tuberculines are classified in (a) 
Tuberculine-Subcutaneous (b) Heat concentrated synthetic Medium (H.C.S.M.) 
Tuberculine (c) Avian tuberculine. 
2. Preparation—(a) Tuberculine subcutaneous—Flasks containing Henley 
and Dorset synthetic medium are inoculated with standard human strains of 
Myco. Tuberculosis previously grown on glycerol -beef broth medium for ten 
days. After ten to twelve weeks o f incubation at 37°C flasks containing pure 
growth are steamed for three hours. The contents are filtered through fine 
meshed sieve and the volume is made up to its original with phenolised distilled 
water such that the final concentration of phenol is 0.5 per cent. It is then 
filtered through Seitz filter. 
(b) Heat Concentrated Synthetic Medium (H.C.S.M.) Tuberculine —To the 
strained liquid obtained after sieving as in the method of preparation of 
tuberculine subcutaneous, glycerol is added in the proportion of 122 ml. per litre 
of the original volume of medium used. The mixture is evaporated to one -fifth 
of the original volume on a steam bath. An equal volume of 1 per cent phenol in 
distilled water is added after the mixture is cooled. The product is sto red at 
47°C for fourteen days before it is filtered through Seitz filter. It is then 
dispensed in ampoules. 
(c) Avian Tuberculine Concentrated —The procedure is the same as for 
Tuberculine Concentrated (H.C.S.M.) except that standard strain of 
Mycotuberculosis (Avian) is used in its preparation. 
3. Standards— 
(a) Description—A yellowish brown viscous liquid. 
(b) Identification—When injected intradermaliy into the animal 
infected with tuberculosis diffused swelling occurs depending upon the 
allergic status of the animal, the magnitude of dose and specificity of the 
product. In non-infected animals this reaction is not observed. 
(c) Sterility Test—Should comply with the test for sterility described in 
the general monograph on 'Diagnostic Antigens'. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(d) Potency Test—(i) Tuberculine subcutaneous—Six large white guinea-
pigs each weighing not less than 300 -450 g. are individually inoculated 
intramuscularly with 0.5 mg. (moist growth from solid plants) of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis three weeks prior to te st of each batch of 
tuberculine : the following dilutions of (a) test tuberculine and (b) 
standard tuberculine are used:— 
1 in 200, 1 in 400, 1 in 800, 1 in 1000. 
The six sensitized guinea pigs are depilated on one flank and after 
about twenty -four hours e ach animal inoculated intradermaliy with 0.2 
ml. of each dilution of the two tuberculines in two rows. The reactions are 
read after twenty -four and forty eight hours. When the local reactions 
produced by the graded inter -dermal injections of the two prepar ations 
are comparable the brew is passed for issue. 
(ii) Heat Concentrated Synthetic Medium (H.C.S.M.) Tuberculine —Six 
adult white guinea pigs each weighing not less than 300 -450 g. and 
sensitized three weeks previously with 0.5 mg. (moist growth from s olid 
plants) of Myco-Tuberculosis bovine type, injected intramuscularly are 
used for test of each batch. The following dilutions of (a) test tuberculine 
and (b) standard tuberculine are used:— 
1 in 500, 1 in 1000, 1 in 2000 and 1 in 4000. 
The six sensitize d guinea pigs are depilated on one flank and after 
twenty-four hours each animal is inoculated intradermaliy with 0.2 ml. of 
each dilution of the two tuberculines in two rows. The reactions are read 
after twenty four and forty eight hours. When the local r eaction produced 
by the graded intradermic injections of the two preparations are 
comparable, the test tuberculine is passed for issue. The tuberculine is 
dispensed in ampoules. 
(iii) Avian Tuberculine—Six adult fowls, with well developed wattles, 
sensitized at least three weeks previously by intramuscular injection with 
10 mg. moist weight (from solid plants) of twenty one days old culture of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Avian Type) are used for potency test of 
each batch. In each fowl, one wattle is ino culated with 0.2 ml. of 
undiluted test tuberculine and the other wattle with similar quantity of 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
undiluted standard tuberculine. The reactions in each fowl are read after 
twenty four hours and forty eight hours and if comparable the product is 
passed for issue. 
5. Labelling and Storage — Should comply with the requirements of 
'Labelling' and 'Storage' as laid down in the general monograph on 'Diagnostic 
Antigens'. 
6. Expiry Date—The date of expiry of potency shall be not more than two 
years from the date of manufacture when stored at 2°C to 4°C. 
PART IV 
GENERAL 
1. For the purposes of this Schedule any test or method of testing described 
in the 1100[British Pharmacopoeia (Veterinary)] shall be deemed to be a method 
approved by the licensing authority. 
2. The licensing authority shall publish in the Official Gazette from time to 
time particulars of any test or method of testing approved by him.] 
1101[SCHEDULE F(II) 
(See rule 124C) 
STANDARDS FOR SURGICAL DRESSINGS 
Synonyms—Bandage Cloth, Bleached Bandage Cloth, Rolled Bandage, 
Open Wove Bandage, Cotton Bandage Cloth. 
Bandage Cloth consists of cotton cloth of plain weave made from machine 
spun yarn of suitable count to comply with a bleached count between 20 tex and 
25 tex for warp and between 25 tex and 30 tex for weft. The fabric contains no 
filling, sizing or dressing material. It may be supplied uncut and folded or cut to 
suitable sizes and rolled. 
Description for uncut bandages —Uncut bandages are cotton cloth of plain 
weave, in one continuous length showing no joints or seams, with well -formed 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
selvedges. The cloth is bleached to a good white, is clean and odourless and 
reasonably free from weaving defects and from seed and leaf debris. 
Description for cut bandages —Same as for uncut bandages, except for 
selvedges which shall not be included in cut bandages. In addition, both the 
extremes and edges of cut bandages shall be straight and evenly cut, with 
reasonable freedom from loose threads. 
Threads per dm — Wrap not less than 150 and weft not less than 85. 
Weight in glm2 — 57 + 5. 
Length and Width —The length and width shall not be less than 99 per cent 
each of the length and width stated on the label. For cut bandages, each of the 
bandages in a packing complies with this requirement. 
Foreign matter —Not more than 2 per cent. 
Fluorescence—When viewed under screened ultra-violet light, not more than 
occasional points of fluorescence are observed. 
Packing, Labelling and Storage—Bandage Cloth shall be packed securely so 
as to allow normal handling and transport without tearing and exposing the 
contents. In packages of cut and rolled bandages, each bandage shall also 
individually be wrapped in a suitable paper. The net content is stated on the 
label in te rms of length and width. Bandage Cloth must be stored in packed 
condition, protected from dust. The packings of Bandage Cloth shall be labelled 
prominently with the words "Non-sterile". 
Absorbent Gauze —Synonyms—Gauze; Unmedicated Gauze; Absorbent 
Cotton Gauze. 
Absorbent Gauze is cotton fabric of plain weave, supplied in various widths 
and lengths. The Gauze is bleached and free from any sizing, dressing or filling 
material. The yard used is machine spun cotton yarn, of suitable count to 
comply with a bleached count between 17 and 25 tex in the finished fabric. 
Description—Cotton cloth, plain weave, with a simple selvedge present on 
both sides to prevent unravelling of yam. The cloth is bleached to a good white, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
is clean, odourless, reasonably free from fabric defects and adhering sand debris 
from cotton seeds and leaves, or any other foreign matter. 
Threads per dm — Wrap not less than 75 and weft not less than 55. 
Weight in glm2 — 30 + 5. 
Length and Width —Not less than 98 per cent each of the length and width 
stated on the label. 
Absorbency—Average sinking time not more than 10 seconds. 
Fluorescence—When viewed under screened ultra-violet light not more than 
occasional points of fluorescence are observed. 
Foreign matter—Not more than 1 per cent. 
Sterility—If sterile, the contents comply with the test for sterility. 
Packing, Labelling and Storage —Absorbent Gauze is folded and packed 
with such material and so securely as to protect its absorbency and allow normal 
handling and transport without tearing and exposin g the contents. The net 
content is stated on the label in terms of length and width. The packages shall be 
labelled prominently with the words "Non-Sterile". If sterile, it shall be so stated 
on the label, and the packing method and material shall be such as to maintain 
the sterility. The absorbent Gauze must also comply with the Sterility Test. 
Absorbent Gauze must be stored in packed conditions protected from moisture 
and dust. 
METHODS OF TEST 
Defect in fabric—The sample is unfolded, opened and held again st diffused 
daylight or spread on black topped table to locate and identify prominently 
visible defect in yam and fabric construction. The fabric shall be reasonably free 
from holes, slubs, snarls and naps as well as the following:— 
Odour—Misty odour, or a ny objectionable smell like that of chemicals or 
materials used in sizing and bleaching. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Skewness—(For Bandage Cloth only). A condition where warp and weft do 
not keep at right angles to each other. 
Defective selvedge—The selvedge tearing and allowing yam to unravel, and 
loop formation at selvedge. 
Crack—Prominent streaks of space or gaps between warp or weft yarns. 
Double ends—More warp threads woven as one, due to wrong draw. 
Sloughing—Entanglement in the fabric of a bulk of yarn that has slipped off 
the weft yam due to loose widing. 
Measurement to length and width —Length is the distance from end to 
end, along one edge of the fabric, and width is the perpendicular distance from 
one edge to the opposite edge. 
Length—Fix a metre scale to a table or mark off the division of one metre on 
a table edge. Starting from one end, spread the fabric flat on that table in a 
single layer keeping one selvedge parallel to the scale; smoothcn the fabric 
without stretching it, to avoid creases, and mark off with a coloured p encil, on 
the selvedge exactly one metre. Shift the fabric and measure in the same way 
the second mete and so on for the entire length of the fabric making a mark at 
each metre. Note down the total length in metres. Repeat this at the opposite 
selvedge, as well as on the fabric folded approximately about middle. The 
average of the three readings is the length. For cut bandages, one measurement 
at the middle of the bandage by folding it length-wise will suffice. 
Width—Lay the portion of the fabric to be meas ured flat and smooth on 
table, but do not stretch fabric except sufficiently to render it creaseless. At the 
place where mark had been made on the selvedge in measuring the length 
measure the perpendicular distance to the opposite selvedge with a metre sca le. 
Note the width, repeat this at every mark made in measuring the length. The 
average of all the readings is the width of the fabric. For cut bandages, width 
shall be measured at every 50 cm., and average reported as width. 
Threads per dm—(For samples not less than 15 m. in Length.) 
Weft—At the third metre from one extreme locate three places one at about 
5 cm. below the top selvedge, a second in the middle and third at about 5 cm. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
above the bottom selvedge, all three in a vertical row. Take a rectangular plate 
(made of suitable material such as plastic or aluminium) with the rectangular 
opening of 5 cm. x 10 cm. cut in it. Keep the plate on the fabric horizontally so 
that the left 5 cm. side and bottom (10 cm. side) edges of the opening coincides 
with a w eft and warp yarn respectively; count the number of weft yams within 
the opening for the length of 10 cm. Repeat this at the other two selected places, 
and note down the average of three readings. Repeat this at every third metre in 
the sample and calculate the average weft per dm. 
Warp—Keep the rectangular plate, this time vertically with left (10 cm. 
side) and bottom (5 cm. side) edge of opening coinciding with a weft and warp 
yam respectively. Count the number of warp yams within the opening for 10 
cm. a nd note down. Repeat this for about 10 selected places in the samples 
taking care that the same set of warp yarns is not counted more than twice and 
calculate the average warp per dm. Magnifying glass mounted on stand may be 
used for counting. 
For samples less than 15 m. in length, locate as many different places as the 
dimension of the fabric permits, the total being not less than 10 for each sample, 
and calculate the warp and weft per dm. as above. 
For cut bandages, all the warp threads in the samples are counted, taking 
care to leave 5 mm. at the cut edge, and weft is counted at every 50 cm. at any 
place about the middle of the bandage. 
Weight per unit area —For samples not less than 15 m. in length, cut out 
pieces of fabric from the entire length of the sample, representative places being 
taken from areas at every third or fourth metre so that the total area of all the 
pieces so collected is not less than 3 sq. metre. Weight the pieces accurately, 
measure the dimension of each of the pieces and calculate t he area and weight 
of all the pieces. From the average area and average of weight thus obtained, 
calculate the area per sq. metre. 
For samples less than 15 m. in length, take pieces in such manner that the 
total area of the selected pieces is not less than 20 per cent of the total area of 
the sample 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
For cut bandages, pieces of 50 cm. in length, cut from 5 different cut 
bandages in a packing should be taken and weight calculated as an average of 5 
readings. 
Absorbency—Take a glass trough of approximate size length 30 cm. x 
width 30 cm x depth 25 cm. with straight thick walls and flat bottom. Fill it 
almost full with distilled water leaving only about 5 cm. from the top rim of 
trough. Maintain the water at 27l’C ± 1°C. 
Cut out from any five places located equi distant down the length of the 
entire sample, square pieces, each weighing one gm. (+ 10 per cent). For each 
piece in such a manner that a square of approximately 5 cm. x 5 cm. is obtained. 
Keep one of the folded test specimen between two glass plates and place 1 kg. 
weight on the top for 10 minutes. Remove the weight. Lift the specimen with 
forceps and gently place it on the surface of water (the specimen should be 
lightly pinched in the middle with the blunt forceps having no serrations). As 
soon as the s pecimen touches the water surface start a stop watch which is 
stopped when the entire sample disappears below the surface of the water. 
Record the time taken. Repeat the test with the other four -test specimens. 
Calculate the average time in seconds. 
Foreign Matter—Dry about 5 g. of the sample to constant weight at 105°C 
and weight the dried sample accurately. Extract the dried sample with 
chloroform for one hour in an apparatus for the continuous extraction of drugs. 
Remove the extracted sample to a beaker and allow the evaporation of residual 
chloroform. Wash the material 12 times with hot water, using about 1000 ml. 
for each washing and wringing the material by hand after each washing; pass all 
water through a fine sieve (100 mesh.). Place the washed material and any loose 
threads or fibres from the sieve in a beaker, cover with a 0.5 per cent aqueous 
solution of diastase and maintain at 50°C until free from starch. Allow to cool, 
filter the solution through a sieve; return sample and loose fibres to a beak er. 
Repeat the washing process as before with hot water. Dry the material to 
constant weight at 105°C, and determine the loss in weight. Calculate the 
percentage of foreign matter, which is equal to the loss in weight, with reference 
to the sample dried to constant weight, at 105°C. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
If the sample is tested with iodine and is known to be free from starch, the 
treatment with solution of diastase and the second series of washing with hot 
water may be omitted. 
Cloth for manufacture of Plaster of Paris Bandages, cut and uncut 
Synonyms: Bleached Bandage Cloth for Plaster of Paris, Rolled Bandage for 
Plaster of Paris. 
Cloth for Plaster of Paris Bandages shall consist of cotton cloth of leno 
weave made from yarn of suitable count. It may be supplied cut or uncut of 
various widths and lengths. 
Description—(a) For uncut bandages —Cotton cloth of leno weave, in one 
continuous length showing no joints or seams, and with selvedges. The cloth is 
bleached to a good white, is clean and odourless and reasonably free from 
weaving defect as well as from seed and leaf debris; the cloth may be dressed if 
necessary and if so, shall not dust off when unrolled. 
(b) For cut bandages —Same as for uncut bandages except for selvedges 
which shall not be included and the bandages shall be cu t evenly with straight 
edges and be reasonably free from loose threads. 
Threads per dm.— 
Warp—Average not less than 150/dm.; and Weft—average not less than 
75/dm. 
Weight in gm.lm.2—35 ± 5. 
Length and Width —The length and width for uncut bandages shall not be 
less than 98 per cent each of the length and width stated. For cut bandages a 
tolerance of ± 5 cm. in length and ± 0.5 cm. in width may be allowed, and each 
of the bandages in packing complies these requirements. 
Fluorescence—When viewed under screened ultra violet light not more than 
occasional points of fluorescence are observed. 
Packing, Labelling and Storage —Bandage Cloth for Plaster of Paris shall 
be packed securely so as to allow normal handling and transport without tearing 
and exposing the conten ts. In packages of cut and rolled bandages, each 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
bandags shall also individually be wrapped in suitable paper. The package shall 
be labelled as "Cloth for Plaster of Paris Bandage". The net content is stated on 
the label in terms of number of rolls and len gth and width. Bandage Cloth for 
Plaster of Paris must be stored in packed condition protected from dust.] 
1102[SCHEDULE F(III) 
(See rule 124D) 
STANDARD FOR UMBILICAL TAPES 
(A) STANDARDS FOR STERILISED UMBILICAL POLYESTER 
TAPE— 
Description—A uniform strand of Polyester yam prepared by braiding and may 
be finished with a suitable silicone finishing material, white to yellowish -white 
in colour. Tape shall be sterilised by Gamma Radiation or by any other suitable 
method approved by the Licensing Authority. 
Other requirements—The Umbilical Polyester Tape shall conform to the 
claims made on the label in respect of length and width. 
Tensile strength —The Umbilical Polyester Tape shall have Tensile 
strength of not less than 4 kgs. on straight pull. 
Packing and labelling —The Umbilical Polyester Tape shall be packed in 
sealed Polythene bags or sealed plastic containers which ensure that when 
packed, the tape is sterile. The packing shall protect the tape from 
contamination and damage. Every packing offered for sale shall bear a clear and 
permanent marking with the following particulars:— 
(i) The proper name of the drug i.e. Umbilical Polyester Tape 'Sterile'. 
(ii) Manufacturer's name and address. 
(iii) Batch Number. 
(iv) Licence number under which the tape is manufactured. 
(v) Date of manufacture and the date of expiry. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(vi) Length and width of the Tape. 
Storage condition— It should be stored in a cool place protected from light 
. 
(B) STANDARDS FOR STERILISED UMBILICAL COTTON TAPE— 
Description—A uniform stand of cotton yam prepared by braiding and may 
be finished with a suitable silicone finishing material, white to yellowish -
white in colour. The tape shall be sterilised by Gamma Radiation or by any 
other suitable method approved by the Licensing Authority. 
Other Requirement —The Umbilical Cotton Tape shall conform to the 
claims made on the label in respect of length and width. 
Tensile Strength—The Umbilical Cotton Tape shall have a Tensile strength 
of not less than 4 kg. on straight pull. 
Packing and Labelling —The Umbilical Cotton Tape shall be packed in 
sealed Polythene bags or sealed plastic containers which ensure that when 
packed the tape is sterile. The packing shall protect the tape from 
contamination and damage. Every packing offered for sale shall bear a clear 
and permanent marking with the following particulars:— 
(i) The proper name of the drug, i.e., Umbilical Cotton Tape 'Sterile'. 
(ii) Manufacturer's name and address 
(iii) Batch Number. 
(iv) Licence number under which the tape is manufactured. 
(v) Date of manufacture and the date of expiry. 
(vi) Length and width of the Tape. 
Storage condition—It should be stored in a cool place protected from light.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1103[SCHEDULE FF 
 (See rule 126A) 
STANDARD FOR OPHTHALMIC PREPARATIONS 
Part A. Ophthalmic Solutions and Suspensions 
Ophthalmic Solutions and Suspensions shall— 
(a) be sterile when dispensed or when sold in the unopened container of the 
manufacturer, except in case of th ose ophthalmic solutions and 
suspensions which are not specifically required to comply with the test for 
'Sterility' in the Pharmacopoeia.; 
(b) contain one or more of the following suitable substances to prevent the 
growth of micro-organisms : 
(i) Benzalkonium Chloride, 0.01 per cent (This should not be 
used in solutions of nitrates or salicylates). 
(ii) Phenyl mercuric nitrate, 0.001 per cent. 
(iii) Chlorobutanol 0.5 per cent. 
(iv) Phenyl ethyl alcohol 0.5 per cent: 
Provided that solutions u sed in surgery shall not have any 
preservative and be packed in single dose container: 
Provided further that the licensing authority may in his 
discretion authorise the use of any other preservative or vary the 
concentration prescribed on being satisfied t hat its use affords 
equal guarantee for preventing the growth of micro-organisms; 
(c) be free from foreign matter; 
(d) be contained in bottles made of either neutral glass or soda glass specially 
treated to reduce the amount of alkali released when i n contact of aqueous 
liquids, or in suitable plastic containers which would not in any way be 
incompatible with the solutions. 
The droppers to be supplied with the containers of ophthalmic 
solutions and suspensions shall be made of neutral glass or of suit able 
plastic material and when supplied separately shall be packed in sterile 
cellophane, or other suitable packings; 
(e) In addition to complying with the provisions of labelling laid down in the 
rules the following particulars shall also be shown on the label— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(1) of the containers 
(i) The statement 'Use the solution within one month after opening the 
container' 
(ii) Name and concentration of the preservative, if used. 
(iii) The words 'NOT FOR INJECTION'. 
(2) of container or carton or package leaflet 
(i) Special instructions regarding storage, wherever applicable. 
(ii) A cautionary legend reading as 
"WARNING : (i) if irritation persists or increases, 
discontinue the use and consult physician. 
(ii) Do not touch the dropper tip or other dispensing tip to 
any surface since this may contaminate solutions." 

Part B. Ophthalmic Ointments Ophthalmic Ointments shall— 
(a) be sterile when dispensed or when sold in the unopened container of 
the manufacturer; 
(b) be free from foreign matter; 
(c) in addition to complying with the provisions for labelling laid down in 
the rules the following particulars shall be shown on the container or 
carton or package leaflet— 
(i) Special instructions regarding storage wherever applicable. 
(ii) A cautionary legend reading 

"WARNING : If irritation persists or increases, discontinue the use 
and consult physician.."] 

1104[SCHEDULE G 
(See rule 97) 

Aminopterin 
L-Asparaginase 
Bleomycin 
Busulphan; its salts 
Carbutamide 
Chlorambucil;its salts 
Chlorothiazide and other derivatives of 1, 
2, 4 benzothiadiazine 
Chlorpropamide; its salts 
Chlorthalidone and other derivatives of 
Chlorobenzene compound. 
1105[Cis-Platin] 
Cyclophosphamide; its salts 
1105[Cytarabine] 
Daunorubicin 
Di-Isopropyl Eluorophosphate 
Disodium Stilboestrol Diphosphate 
Doxorubicin Hydrochloride 
Ethacrynic Acid, its salts 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Ethosuximide 
Glibenclamide 
Hydantoin; its salts; its derivatives, their 
salts 
Hydroxyurea 
Insulin, all types 
1105[(Lomustine Hydrochloride)] 
Mannomustine; its salts 
Mercaptopurine; its salts 
Metformin; its salts 
Methsuximide 
Mustine, its salts 
Paramethadione 
Phenacemide 
Phenformin; its salts 
5-Phenylhydantoin; its alkyl and aryl 
derivatives; its salts 
Primadone 
1106[Procarpazine Hydrochloride] 
Quinthazone 
Sarcolysine 
1107[(Sodium-2-Mercaptoethanesulfonate] 
Tamoxiten Citrate 
Testolactone 
Thiotepa 
Tolbutamide 
Tretamine; its salts 
Troxidone 

Antihistaminic substances the following, their salts, their derivatives, salts of 
their derivatives 
Antazoline 
Bromodiphenhydramine 
Buclizine 
Chlorcyclizine 
Chlorpheniramine 
Clemizole 
Cyproheptadine 
Diphenhydramine 
Diphenylpyraline 
Doxylamine Succinate 
Isothipendyl 
Mebhydrolin Napadisylate 
Meclozine 
Phenindamine 
Pheniramine 
Promethazine 
Thenalidine 
Triprolidine 

Substances being tetra -N-Subs. derivatives of Ethylene Diamine or 
Prophylenediamine. 
Note.—Preparations containing the above substances excluding those 
intended for topical or external use are also covered by this Schedule.] 
1108[SCHEDULE H] 
(See rules 65 and 97) 
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS 
1. Abacavir 
2. Abciximab 
3. Acamprosate Calcium 
4. Acebutol Hydrochloride 
5. Aclarubicin 
6. Albendazole 
7. Alclometasone Dipropionate 
8. Actilyse 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
9. Acyclovir 
10. Adenosine 
11. Adrenocorticotrophic Hormone 
(Acth) 
12. Alendronate Sodium 
13. Aliopurinol 
14. Alphachymotrypsin 
15. 1109[***] 
16. Alprostadil 
17. Amantadine Hydrochloride 
18. Amifostine 
19. Amikacin Sulphate 
20. Amiloride Hydrochloride 
21. Aminepline 
22. Aminoglu tethimide 
23. Aminosalicylic Acid 
24. Amiodarone Hydrochloride 
25. Amitriptyline 
26. Amlodipine Besylate 
27. Amoscanate 
28. Amoxopine 
29. Amrinone Lactate 
30. Analgin 
31. Androgenic Anabolic, Oestrogenic 
& Progestational Substances 
32. Antibiotics 
33. Apraclonidine 
34. Aprotinin 
35. Organic Compound of Arsenic 
36. Arteether 
37. Artemether 
38. Artesunate 
39. Articaine Hydrochloride 
40. Atenolol 
41. Atracurium Besylate Injection 
42. Atorvastatin 
43. Auranofin 
44. Azathioprine 
45. Aztreonam 
46. Bacampicillin 
47. Baclofen 
48. Balsalazide 
49. Bambuterol 
50. Barbituric Acid 
51. Basiliximab 
52. Benazepril Hydrochloride 
53. Benidipine Hydrochloride 
54. Benserazide Hydrochloride 
55. Betahistine Dihydrochloride 
56. Bethanidine Sulphate 
57. Bezafibrate 
58. Bicalutamide 
59. Biclotymol 
60. Bifonazole 
61. Bimatoprost 
62. Biperiden Hydrochloride 
63. Biphenyl Acetic Acid 
64. Bitoscanate 
65. Bleomycin 
66. Primonidine Tartrate 
67. Bromhexine Hydrochloride 
68. Bromocriptine Mesylate 
69. Budesomde 
70. Bulaquine 
71. Bupivacaine Hydrochloride 
72. Bupropion 
73. Buspirone 
74. Butenafine Hydrochloride 
75. Butorphanol Tartrate 
76. Cabergoline 
77. Calciumdobesilate 
78. Candesartan 
79. Capecitabine 
80. Captopril 
81. Carbidopa 
82. Carbocisteine 
83. Carboplatin 
84. Carboquone 
85. Carisoprodol 
86. L-Camitine 
87. Carteolol Hydrochloride 
88. Carvedilol 
89. Cefadroxyl 
90. Cefatoxime Sodium 
91. Cefazolin Sodium 
92. 1110[**** 
93. **** 
94. **** 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
95. **** 
96. **** 
97. **** 
98. ****] 
99. Cefuroxime 
100. Celecoxib 
101. Centchroman 
102. Centbutindole 
103. Centpropazine 
104. Cetirizine Hydrochloride 
105. 1111[***] 
106. Chlormezanone 
107. 1112[***] 
108. Chlorpromazine 
109. Chlorzoxazone 
no. Ciclopirox Olamine 
111. Cimetidine 
112. Cinnarizine 
113. Ciprofloxacin Hydrochloride 
 Monohydrate / Lactate 
114. Cisplatin 
115. Citalopram Hydrobromide 
116. Clarithromycin 
117. Clavulanic Acid 
118. Clidinium Bromide 
119. Clindamycin 
120. Clobazam 
121. Clobetasol Propenate 
122. Clobetasone 17-Butyrate 
123. 1113[***] 
124. Clofibrate 
125. Clonazepam 
126. Clonidine Hydrochloride 
127. Clopamide 
128. Clopidogre! Bisulphate 
129. Clostebol Acetate 
130. Clotrimazole 
131. Clozapine 
132. 1113[***] 
133. Colchicine 
134. Corticosteroids 
135. Cotrimoxazole 
136. Cyclandelate 
137. Cyclosporins 
138. Daclizumab 
139. Danazole 
140. Dapsone 
141. Desloratadine 
142. Desogestrol 
143. Dexrazoxane 
144. Dextranomer 
145. 1111[***] 
146. Dextropropoxyphene 
147. 1111[***] 
148. Diazoxide 
149. Diclofenac 
Sodium/Potassium/Acid 
150. Dicyclomin Hydrochloride 
151. Didanosine 
152. Digoxine 
153. Dilazep Hydrochloride 
154. Diltiazem 
155. Dinoprostone 
156. 1114[***] 
157. Dipivefrin Hydrochloride 
158. Di-sodium Pamidronate 
159. Disopyramide 
160. Docetaxel 
161. Domperidone 
162. Donepezil Hydrochloride 
163. Dopamine Hydrochloride 
164. Dothiepin Hydrochloride 
165. Doxapram Hydrochloride 
166. Doxazosin Mesylate 
167. Doxepin Hydrochloride 
168. Doxorubicin Hydrochloride 
169. Drotrecogin-Alpha 
170. Ebastine 
171. Econozole 
172. Efavirenz 
173. Enalapril Meleate 
174. Enfenamic Acid 
175. Epinephrine 
176. Epirubicine 
177. Eptifibatide 
178. Ergot, Alkaloids of whether 
 Hydrogenated or not, their 
 Homologoues, Salts 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
179. Esomeprazole 
180. Estradiol Succinate 
181. Estramustine Phosphate 
182. Etanercept 
183. Ethacridine Lactate 
184. 1115[***] 
185. Ethamsylate 
186. Ethinyloestradiol 
187. 1115[***] 
188. Etidronate Disodium 
189. Etodolac 
190. Etomidate 
191. Etoposide 
192. Exemestane 
193. Famciclovir 
194. Famotidine 
195. Fenbendazole 
196. Fenofibrate 
197. Fexofenadine 
198. Finasteride 
199. Flavoxate Hydrochloride 
200. 5-Fluorouracil 
201. Fludarabine 
202. Flufenamic Acids 
203. Flunarizine Hydrochloride 
204. Fluoxetine Hydrochloride 
205. Flupenthixol 
206. Fluphenazine Enanthate and 
Decanoate 
207. Flurazepam 
208. Flurbiprofen 
209. Flutamide 
210. Fluticasone Propionate 
211. Fluvoxamine Maleate 
212. Formestane 
213. Fosfestril Sodium 
214. Fosinopril Sodium 
215. Fossphenytoin Sodium 
216. Fotemustine 
217. Gabapentin 
218. Galanthamine Hydrobromide 
219. Gallamine, its Salts, its Quaternary 
 Compound 
220. Gancyclovir 
221. Ganirelix 
222. Gatifloxacin 
223. Gemcitabine 
224. Gemfibrozil 
225. Gemtuzumab 
226. Genodeoxycholic Acid 
227. Gliclazide 
228. Glimepiride 
229. Glucagon 
230. Glycopyrrolate 
231. Glydiazinamide 
232. Goserelin Acetate 
233. Granisetron 
234. Guanethidine 
235. Gugulipid 
236. Halogenated Hydroxyquinolines 
237. Haloperidol 
238. Heparin 
239. Hepatitis B. Vaccine 
240. Hyaluronidase 
241. Hydrocorisone 17-Butyrate 
242. Hydrotalcite 
243. Hydroxizine 
244. Ibuprofen 
245. Idebenone 
246. Iindapamide 
247. Imipramine 
248. Indinavir Sulphate 
249. Indomethacin 
250. Insulin Human 
251. Interferon 
252. Intravenous Fat Emulsion 
253. Iobitridol 
254. Iohexol 
255. Iopamidol 
256. Iomeprol 
257. Iopromide 
258. Irbesartan 
259. Irinotecan Hydrochloride 
260. Iron Preparation for Parenteral use 
261. Isepamicine 
262. Isocarboxside 
263. Isoflurane 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
264. Isonicotnic Acid Hydrazine and 
other Hydragine Derivatives of 
Isonicotinic Acid 
265. Isosorbide Dinitrate/Mononitrate 
266. Isotretinoin 
267. Isoxsuprine 
268. Itopride 
269. 1116[***] 
270. Ketoconazole 
271. Ketoprofen 
272. Ketorolac Tromethamine 
273. Labetalol Hydrochloride 
274. Lacidipine 
275. Lamivudine 
276. Lamotrigine 
277. Latanoprost 
278. Lefunomide 
279. Lercanidipine Hydrochloride 
280. Letrozole 
281. Leuprolide Acetate 
282. Levamesole 
283. Levarterenol 
284. Levobunolol 
285. Levocetirizine 
286. Levodopa 
287. 1115[***] 
288. Levovist 
289. Lidoflazine 
290. Linezplid 
291. Lithium Carbonate 
292. Lofepramine Decanoate 
293. Loperamide 
294. Lorazepam 
295. Losartan Potassium 
296. Loteprednol 
297. Lovastatin 
298. Loxapine 
299. Mebendazole 
300. Mebeverine Hydrochloride 
301. Medroxy Progesterone Acetate 
302. Mefenamic Acid 
303. Mefloquine Hydrochloride 
304. Megestrol Acetate 
305. Meglumine Iocarmate 
306. Melagenina 
307. Melitracen Hydrochloride 
308. Meloxicam 
309. Mephenesin, its Esters 
310. Mephentermine 
311. 1117[***] 
312. Mesterolone 
313. Metaxalone 
314. Methicillin Sodium 
315. Methocarbamol 
316. Methotraxate 
317. Metoclopramide 
318. Metoprolol Tartrate 
319. Metrizamide 
320. Metronidazole 
321. Mexiletine Hydrochloride 
322. Mianserin Hydrochloride 
323. Miconazole 
324. 1117[***] 
325. Mifepristone 
326. Milrinone Lactate 
327. Miltefosine 
328. Minocycline 
329. Minoxidil 
330. Mirtazapine 
331. Misoprostol 
332. Mitoxantrone Hydrochloride 
333. Mizolastine 
334. Moclobemide 
335. Mometasone Furoate 
336. Monteiukast Sodium 
337. Morphazinamide Hydrochloride 
338. Mosapride 
339. 1117[***] 
340. Mycophenolate Mofetil 
341. Nadifloxacin 
342. Nadolol 
343. Nafarelin Acetate 
344. Nalidixic Acid 
345. Naproxen 
346. Narcotic Drugs listed in Narcotic 
Drugs & Psychotropic Substances 
Act, 1985 
347. Natamycin 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
348. Nateglinide 
349. N-butyI-2-cyanoacrylate 
350. Nebivolol 
351. Nebumetone 
352. Nelfinavir Mesilate 
353. Netilmicin Sulphate 
354. Nevirapine 
355. Nicergoline 
356. Nicorandil 
357. Nifedipine 
358. Nimesulide 
359. Nimustine Hydrochloride 
360. 1117[***] 
361. Nitroglycerin 
362. Noreth Isterone Enanthate 
363. Norfloxacin 
364. Octylonium Biomiae 
365. Ofloxacin 
366. Olanzapine 
367. Omeprazole 
368. Omidazole 
369. Orphenadrine 
370. Orthoclone Sterile 
371. Oxazepam 
372. Oxazolidine 
373. Oxcarbazepine 
374. Oxethazaine Hydrochlorid 
375. Oxiconazole 
376. Oxolinic Acid 
377. Oxprenolol Hydrochloride 
378. Oxybutynin Chloride 
379. Oxyfedrine 
380. Oxymetazoline 
381. Oxyphenbutazone 
382. 1118[***] 
383. Ozothine 
384. Paclitaxel 
385. Pancuronium Bromide 
386. Pantopiazole 
387. Para-Amino Benzene 
Sulphonamide, its Salts & 
Derivatives 
388. Parp-Amino Salicylic Acid, its 
Salts, its Derivatives 
389. Parecoxib 
390. Paroxetine Hydrochloride 
391. D-Penicillamine 
392. 1117[***] 
393. Pentoxifylline 
394. Pepleomycin 
395. Phenelzineh Sulphate 
396. Phenobarbital 
397. Phenothiazine, Derivatives of and 
Salts of its Derivatives 
398. Phenylbutazine 
399. Pimozide 
400. Pindolol 
401. Pioglitazone Hydrochloride 
402. Piracetam 
403. Piroxicam 
404. Pituitary Gland, Active Principles 
of, not otherwise specified in this 
Schedule and their Salts 
405. Polidocanol 
406. Polyestradiol Phosphate 
407. Poractant Alfa 
408. Praziquantel 
409. Pred nimustine 
410. Prednisolone Stearoylglycoiate 
411. Prenoxdiazin Hydrochloride 
412. Promazine Hydrochloride 
413. Promegestone 
414. Propafenon Hydrochloride 
415. Propanolol Hydrochloride 
416. Propofol 
417. Protristyline Hydrochloride 
418. 1117[***] 
419. Pyrvinium 
420. Quetiapine Fumerate 
421. Quinapril 
422. Quiniaine Sulphate 
423. Rabeprazole 
424. Racecadotril 
425. Raloxifene Hydrochloride 
426. Ramipril Hydrochloride 
427. Ranitidine 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
428. Rauwolfia, Alkaloids of, their 
Salts, Derivatives of the Alkaloids 
or Rauwolfia 
429. Reboxetine 
430. Repaglinide 
431. Reproterol Hydrochloride 
432. Rilmenidine 
433. Riluzone 
434. Risperidone 
435. Ritonavir 
436. Ritodrine hydrochloride 
437. Rituximab 
438. Rivastigmine 
439. Rocuronium bromide 
440. Ropinirole 
441. Rosoxacin. 
442. Rosiglitazone meleate 
443. Salbutamol sulphate 
444. Salicyl-azo-sulphapyridine 
445. Salmon calcitonin 
446. Saquinavir 
447. Satranidazole 
448. Secnidazole 
449. Septopal beads & chains 
450. Serratiopeptidase 
451. Sertraline hydrochloride 
452. Sibutramine hydrochloride 
453. Sildenafil citrate 
454. Simvastatin 
455. Sirolimus 
456. Sisomicin sulphate 
457. S-neominophagen 
458. Sodiumpico sulphate 
459. Sodium cromoglycate 
460. Sodium hyaluronate 
461. Sodium valproate 
462. Sodium and maglumine 
iothalamates 
463. Somatostatin 
464. Somatotropin 
465. Sotalol 
466. 1119[***] 
467. Spectinomycin hydrochloride 
468. Spironolactone 
469. Stavudine 
470. Sucralfate 
471. Sulphadoxine 
472. Sulphamethoxine 
473. Sulphamethoxypyridazine 
474. Sulphaphenazole 
475. Sulpiride 
476. Sulprostone hydrochloride 
477. Sumatriptan 
478. Tacrine hydrochloride 
479. Tamsulosin hydrochloride 
480. Trapidil 
481. Tegaserod maleate 
482. Teicoplanin 
483. Telmisartan 
484. Temozolamide 
485. Terazosin 
486. Terbutaline sulphate 
487. Terfenadine 
488. Terizidone 
489. Terlipressin 
490. Testosteroneun decoanoate 
491. Teratolol hydrochloride 
492. Thalidomide 
493. 1119[***] 
494. Thiocolchicoside 
495. Thiopropazate, its salts 
496. Thymogene 
497. Thymosin-alpha1 
498. Tiaprofenic acid 
499. Tibolone 
500. Timolol maleate 
501. Tinidazole 
502. Tizanidine 
503. Tabramycin 
504. Tolfenamic acid 
505. Topiramate 
506. Topotecan hydrochloride 
507. 1119[***] 
508. Tranexamic acid 
509. Tranylcypromine, its salts 
510. Trazodone 
511. Tretinoin 
512. Trifluperazine 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
513. Trifluperidol hydrochloride 
514. Triflusal 
515. Trimetazidine dihydrochloride 
516. Trimipramine 
517. Tripotassium dicitrate bismuthate 
518. Tromantadine hydrochloride 
519. Urokinase 
520. Valsartan 
521. Vasopressin 
522. Vecuronium bromide 
523. Venlafaxine hydrochloride 
524. Verapamil hydrochloride 
525. Verteporfin 
526. Vincristine sulphate 
527. Vinblastine sulphate 
528. Vindesine sulphate 
529. Vinorelbine tatrate 
530. Xipamide 
531. Zidovudine hydrochloride 
532. Ziprasidone hydrochloride 
533. Zoledronic acid 
534. 1119[***] 
535. Zopiclone 
536. Zuclopenthixol 
1120[537.Etizolam] 
1121[538.Alclometasone 
539.Beclomethasone 
540.Betamethasone 
541.Desonide 
542.Desoximetasone 
543.Dexamethasone 
544.Diflorasone diacetate 
545.Fluocinonide 
546.Huocinolone acetonide 
547.Halobetasol propionate 
548.Halometasone 
549.Methylprednisone 
550.Prednicarbate 
551.Triamcinolone acetonide] 
1336[552. Acitretin]

Note: —1. Preparations exempted under proviso to para 2 of Note to Schedule 
X shall also be covered by this Schedule. 
2. The salts, esters, derivatives and preparations containing the above 
substances excluding those intended for topical or external use (except 
ophthalmic and ear/nose preparations containi ng antibiotics and/or steroids) are 
also covered by this Schedule. 
3. The inclusion of a substance in this Schedule does not imply or convey that 
the substance is exempted from the provisions of Rule 122A/122B.] 
1122[4. The s alts, esters, derivativ es and preparations containing 1123[steroids or 
Hydroquinone] for topical or external use shall also be covered under this 
Schedule. 
1124[5. Notwithstanding anything contained i n these rules, the provisions of rule 
65 and rule 97 in respect or drugs specified from serial number 538 to serial 
number 551 inserted vide Notification number G.S.R. 277(E), dated 23rd 
March, 2018 published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II , Section 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(3), Sub-section (i) shall be on voluntary basis for a period commencing on the 
day on which this notification shall come into force and ending on the 31st 
March, 2019 and thereafter shall be mandatory.] 
1125[SCHEDULE H1 
 (See rules 65 and 97) 
1. Alprazolam 
2. Balofloxacin 
3. Buprenorphine 
4. Capreomycin 
5. Cerdinir 
6. Cefditoren 
7. Cefepime 
8. Cefetamet 
9. Cefixime 
10. Cefoperazone 
11. Cefotaxime 
12. Cefpirome 
13. Cefpodoxime 
14. Ceftazidime 
15. Ceftibuten 
16. Ceftizoxime 
17. Ceftriaxone 
18. Chlordiazepoxide 
19. Clofazimine 
20. Codeine 
21. Cycloserine 
22. Diazepam 
23. Diphenoxylate 
24. Doripenem 
25. Ertapenem 
26. Ethambutol Hydrochloride 
27. Ethionamide 
28. Feropenem 
29. Gemifloxacin 
30. Imipenem 
31. lsoniazid 
32. Levofloxacin 
33. Meropenem 
34. Midazolam 
35. Moxifloxacin 
36. Nitrazepam 
37. Pentazocine 
38. Prulifloxacin 
39. Pyrazinamide 
40. Rifabutin 
41. Rifampicin 
42. SodiumPara-aminosalicylate 
43. Sparfloxacin 
44. Tniacetazone 
45. Tramadol 
46. Zolpidem 
1126[47. Oxytocin] 
1127[48. Tapentadol] 
1341[“49. Oseltamivir 
50. Zanamivir”] 

1339[SCHEDULE H2 
[See sub-rules (6) and (7) of rule 96] 

S No. Brand name of the formulation 
1. ACILOC 150 MG TABLET 30 
2. ACILOC 300 MG TABLET 20 
3. ACTEMRA 400 MG INJECTION 1 
4. ACTRAPID HUMAN 40 IU INJECTION 10 ML 
5. AEROCORT WITH DOSE COUNTER 50/50 MCG INHALER 200 MDI 
6. AJADUO 25/5 MG TABLET 10 
7. ALLEGRA 120 MG TABLET 10 
8. ALLEGRA 180 MG TABLET 10 
9. AMBISOME 50 MG INJECTION 20 ML 
10. AMICIN 500 MG INJECTION 2 ML 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
S No. Brand name of the formulation 
11. AMLOKIND-AT 50/5 MG TABLET 10 
12. ASCORIL D PLUS NEW 5/2/10 MG SYRUP 100 ML 
13. ASCORIL LS 1/30/50 MG SYRUP 100 ML 
14. ASCORIL PLUS 50/1.25/2 MG EXPECTORANT 120 ML 
15. ASTHAKIND DX 5/2/15 MG SYRUP 100 ML 
16. ASTHALIN 100 MCG INHALER 200 MDI 
17. AUGMENTIN DUO 500/125 MG TABLET 10 
18. AVOMINE 25 MG TABLET 10 
19. AXCER 90 MG TABLET 14 
20. AZEE 500 MG TABLET 5 
21. AZITHRAL 500 MG TABLET 5 
22. BECOSULES CAPSULE 20 
23. BECOSULES Z CAPSULE 20 
24. BETADINE 10 % OINTMENT 20 GM 
25. BETADINE 10 % SOLUTION 100 ML 
26. BETADINE MINT 2 % GARGLE 100 ML 
27. BETNESOL 0.5 MG TABLET 20 
28. BETNOVATE C 0.1/3 % CREAM 30 GM 
29. BETNOVATE N 0.1/0.5 % CREAM 20 GM 
30. BETNOVATE N 0.1/0.5 % CREAM 25 GM 
31. BETT 0.5 ML INJECTION 0.5 ML 
32. BEVON SYRUP 200 ML 
33. BIO D3 MAX 500 MG/0.25MCG/400MCG/120MG CAPSULE 15 
34. BRILINTA 90 MG TABLET 14 
35. BRO ZEDEX 50/1.25/4 MG SYRUP 100 ML 
36. BUDECORT 0.5 MG RESPULES 2 ML 
37. CALCIROL 60000 IU GRANULES 1 GM 
38. CALDIKIND PLUS 500 MG/0.25MCG/400MCG/60MG CAPSULE 10 
39. CALPOL 500 MG TABLET 15 
40. CALPOL 650 MG TABLET 15 
41. CALPOL PEAD 250 MG SUSPENSION 60 ML 
42. CANDIFORCE 200 MG CAPSULE 7 
43. CCM 250 MG TABLET 40 
44. CEFAKIND 500 MG TABLET 10 
45. CEFTUM 500 MG TABLET 4 
46. CEPODEM 200 MG TABLET 10 
47. CHYMORAL FORTE 100000 IU TABLET 20 
48. CIDMUS 24/26 MG TABLET 14 
49. CILACAR 10 MG TABLET 15 
50. CIPREMI 100 MG INJECTION 1 
51. CLARIBID 500 MG TABLET 10 
52. CLAVAM 500/125 MG TABLET 10 
53. CLEXANE 40 MG INJECTION 0.4 ML 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
S No. Brand name of the formulation 
54. CLEXANE 60 MG INJECTION 0.6 ML 
55. COBADEX CZS TABLET 15 
56. CODISTAR 4/10 MG SYRUP 100 ML 
57. COMBIFLAM 400/325 MG TABLET 20 
58. CONCOR 5 MG TABLET 10 
59. COREX DX 4/10 MG SYRUP 100 ML 
60. CREMAFFIN PLUS SF 1.25 ML/3.75ML/3.33MG LIQUID 225 ML 
61. CYPON 275/2 MG SYRUP 200 ML 
62. CYRA D 30/20 MG TABLET SR 10 
63. DALACIN C 300 MG CAPSULE 10 
64. DECA DURABOLIN 50 MG INJECTION 1 
65. DEFCORT 6 MG TABLET 10 
66. DERIPHYLLIN 25.3/84.7 MG INJECTION 2 ML 
67. DEROBIN 1.15/1.15/5.3 % OINTMENT 30 GM 
68. DEXONA (VIAL) 4 MG INJECTION 2 ML 
69. DEXORANGE 160 MG/0.5MG/7.5MCG SYRUP 200 ML 
70. DOLO 650 MG TABLET 15 
71. DOLONEX 20 MG TABLET DT 15 
72. DOXINATE 10/10 MG TABLET 30 
73. DOXT SL 100 MG/5BIU CAPSULE 10 
74. DOXY 1 FORTE L DR 100 MG/5BIU CAPSULE 10 
75. DULCOFLEX 5 MG TABLET 10 
76. DUOLIN 3 1.25 MG/500MCG RESPULES 3 ML 
77. DUPHASTON 10 MG TABLET 10 
78. DYDROBOON 10 MG TABLET 10 
79. DYNAPAR AQ 75 MG INJECTION 1 ML 
80. EASY SIX PREFILLED SYRINGE 0.5 ML 
81. ECOSPRIN AV 10/75 MG CAPSULE 15 
82. ECOSPRIN GOLD 75/20/75 MG TABLET 15 
83. ELAXIM 40 MG INJECTION 1 
84. ELECTRAL SACHET 21.8 GM 
85. ELIQUIS 2.5 MG TABLET 10 
86. ELIQUIS 5 MG TABLET 10 
87. ELTROXIN 100 MCG TABLET 120 
88. ENTEROGERMINA 2 BIU ORAL SUSPENSION 5 ML 
89. EXHEP 40 MG PREFILLED SYRINGE 0.4 ML 
90. FABIFLU 200 MG TABLET 34 
91. FABIFLU 400 MG TABLET 17 
92. FABIFLU COPACK 800 MG TABLET 18 
93. FARONEM 200 MG TABLET 10 
94. FARONEM 300 MG TABLET ER 10 
95. FORACORT 20/500 MCG RESPULES 2 ML 
96. FORACORT 6/200 MCG ROTACAP 30 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
S No. Brand name of the formulation 
97. FORACORT 6/400 MCG ROTACAP 30 
98. FORXIGA 10 MG TABLET 14 
99. GABAPIN NT 400/10 MG TABLET 15 
100. GALVUS 50 MG TABLET 15 
101. GALVUS MET 50/1000 MG TABLET 15 
102. GALVUS MET 50/500 MG TABLET 15 
103. GEFTINAT 250 MG TABLET 30 
104. GELUSIL MPS 250/50/250 MG LIQUID 200 ML 
105. GEMCAL 500 MG/0.25MCG/7.5MG CAPSULE 15 
106. GEMER 2/500 MG TABLET 10 
107. GIBTULIO 25 MG TABLET 10 
108. GLUCONORM-G 2/500 MG TABLET 15 
109. GLYCOMET GP 1/500 MG TABLET 15 
110. GLYCOMET GP 2/500 MG TABLET SR 15 
111. GLYNASE MF 5/500 MG TABLET 10 
112. GLYXAMBI 25/5 MG TABLET 10 
113. GRILINCTUS 60/2.5/5/50 MG SYRUP 100 ML 
114. GUDCEF 200 MG TABLET 10 
115. GUDCEF CV 200/125 MG TABLET 10 
116. HCQS 200 MG TABLET 15 
117. HEXAXIM INJECTION 0.5 ML 
118. HUCOG HP 5000 IU INJECTION 1 ML 
119. HUMINSULIN 30/70 100 IU CARTRIDGE 3 ML 
120. INFANRIX HEXA INJECTION 0.5 ML 
121. ISTAMET 50/500 MG TABLET 15 
122. IVABRAD 5 MG TABLET 15 
123. IVERMECTOL NEW 12 MG TABLET 2 
124. JALRA M 50/500 MG TABLET 15 
125. JANUMET 50/1000 MG TABLET 15 
126. JANUMET 50/500 MG TABLET 15 
127. JANUVIA 100 MG TABLET 7 
128. JARDIANCE 10 MG TABLET 10 
129. JARDIANCE 25 MG TABLET 10 
130. KABIMOL 1000 MG INFUSION 100 ML 
131. KARVOL PLUS CAPSULE 10 
132. KENACORT 40 MG INJECTION 1 ML 
133. KETOROL 10 MG TABLET DT 15 
134. KETOSTERIL TABLET 20 
135. LANTUS 100 IU CARTRIDGE 3 ML 
136. LANTUS SOLOSTAR 100 IU DISPOSABLE PEN 3 ML 
137. LEVERA 500 MG TABLET 15 
138. LEVIPIL 500 MG TABLET 10 
139. LIBRAX 2.5/5 MG TABLET 20 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
S No. Brand name of the formulation 
140. LIMCEE CHEW ORANGE 500 MG TABLET 15 
141. LIPAGLYN 4 MG TABLET 10 
142. LMWX 40 MG INJECTION 0.4 ML 
143. LOBATE GM NEO 0.05/0.5/2 % CREAM 15 GM 
144. LONOPIN 40 MG INJECTION 0.4 ML 
145. LOSAR 50 MG TABLET 15 
146. LOSAR H 50/12.5 MG TABLET 15 
147. MACBERY XT 50/1.25/4 MG SYRUP 100 ML 
148. MAGNEX FORTE 1000/500 MG INJECTION 1 
149. MANFORCE 100 MG TABLET 4 
150. MANFORCE 50 MG TABLET 9 
151. MAXTRA 5/2 MG SYRUP 60 ML 
152. MEFTAL SPAS 10/250 MG TABLET 10 
153. MEGALIS 20 MG TABLET 4 
154. MEGANEURON OD PLUS 1500 MCG CAPSULE 10 
155. MENACTRA INJECTION 0.5 ML 
156. MERO 1000 MG INJECTION 1 
157. MEROMAC 1000 MG INJECTION 1 
158. MERONEM 1000 MG INJECTION 1 
159. MEROZA 1000 MG INJECTION 1 ML 
160. MIFEGEST KIT 200 MG/200MCG TABLET 1 
161. MIKACIN 500 MG INJECTION 2 ML 
162. MINIPRESS XL 5 MG TABLET XL 30 
163. MIXTARD HM PENFILL 30/70 100 IU INJECTION 3 ML 
164. MIXTARD HUMAN 30/70 40 IU INJECTION 10 ML 
165. MIXTARD HUMAN 50/50 40 IU INJECTION 10 ML 
166. MONOCEF 1000 MG INJECTION 5 ML 
167. MONOCEF O 200 MG TABLET 10 
168. MONOCEF SB 1000/500 MG INJECTION 1 
169. MONTAIR LC 10/5 MG TABLET 15 
170. MONTAZ 1000/125 MG INJECTION 1 
171. MONTEK-LC 10/5 MG TABLET 10 
172. MONTICOPE 10/5 MG TABLET 10 
173. MOX 500 MG CAPSULE 15 
174. MOX CV 500/125 MG TABLET 10 
175. MOXCLAV 500/125 MG TABLET 10 
176. MOXIKIND CV 500/125 MG TABLET 10 
177. MUCAINE MINT 10/291/98 MG GEL 200 ML 
178. MUCINAC SF ORANGE 600 MG TABLET 10 
179. NEBICARD 5 MG TABLET 10 
180. NEFROSAVE 150/500 MG TABLET 15 
181. NEUROBION FORTE TABLET 30 
182. NEXPRO 40 MG TABLET 15 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
S No. Brand name of the formulation 
183. NEXPRO RD 30/40 MG CAPSULE 10 
184. NIKORAN 5 MG TABLET 20 
185. NISE 100 MG TABLET 15 
186. NITROCONTIN 2.6 MG TABLET CR 30 
187. NOVOMIX 100 IU CARTRIDGE 3 ML 
188. NOVOMIX 30/70 MG FLEXPEN 3 ML 
189. NOVORAPID 100 IU CARTRIDGE 3 ML 
190. NUROKIND LC 500 MG/1.5MG/1500MCG TABLET 15 
191. NUROKIND PLUS RF 1500 MCG CAPSULE 10 
192. O2 200/500 MG TABLET 10 
193. OMEZ 20 MG CAPSULE 20 
194. OMEZ D 30/20 MG CAPSULE SR 15 
195. OMNIKACIN 500 MG INJECTION 2 ML 
196. ONDERO 5 MG TABLET 10 
197. ONDERO MET 2.5/500 MG TABLET 10 
198. OROFER FCM INJECTION 10 ML 
199. OROFER-XT 100/1.5 MG TABLET 10 
200. OROFER-XT PLUS 30 MG/500MCG/500MCG SUSPENSION 200 ML 
201. OTRIVIN OXY FAST RELIEF 0.05 % SPRAY 10 ML 
202. OVRAL L 0.03/0.15 MG TABLET 21 
203. OXRA 10 MG TABLET 14 
204. PAN 40 MG TABLET 15 
205. PAN D 30/40 MG CAPSULE 15 
206. PANDERM PLUS PLUS 0.05/0.5/2 % CREAM 15 GM 
207. PANTIN IV 40 MG INJECTION 10 ML 
208. PANTOCID 40 MG TABLET 15 
209. PANTOCID DSR 30/40 MG CAPSULE 15 
210. PANTODAC 40 MG TABLET 15 
211. PANTODAC DSR 30/40 MG CAPSULE 15 
212. PANTOP 40 MG INJECTION 10 ML 
213. PANTOP 40 MG TABLET 15 
214. PANTOP D 10/20 MG CAPSULE 10 
215. PANTOP D SR 30/40 MG CAPSULE SR 10 
216. PHENSEDYL COUGH LINCTUS 4/10 MG SYRUP 100 ML 
217. PIPZO 4000/500 MG INJECTION 10 ML 
218. PRACTIN 4 MG TABLET 10 
219. PREGA NEWS KIT 6 
220. PREVENAR 13 INJECTION 0.5 ML 
221. R.B TONE SYRUP 200 ML 
222. RABLET-D 30/20 MG CAPSULE 10 
223. RANTAC 150 MG TABLET 30 
224. RAZO 20 MG TABLET 15 
225. RAZO D 30/20 MG TABLET 15 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
S No. Brand name of the formulation 
226. REFRESH TEARS 0.5 % EYE DROPS 10 ML 
227. REJUNEX-CD3 TABLET 10 
228. REMDAC 100 MG INJECTION 1 
229. ROSUVAS 10 MG TABLET 15 
230. ROSUVAS 20 MG TABLET 10 
231. RYZODEG 2.56/1.05 MG PENFILL 3 ML 
232. SARIDON 250/50/150 MG TABLET 10 
233. SEROFLO 50/250 MCG ROTACAP 30 
234. SHELCAL 500 MG/250IU TABLET 15 
235. SHELCAL XT 500 MG/2000IU/1500MCG/1MG/20MG TABLET 15 
236. SILODAL 8 MG TABLET 10 
237. SILODAL D 8/0.5 MG TABLET 10 
238. SINAREST 125/5/1 MG SYRUP 60 ML 
239. SINAREST NEW 500/10/2 MG TABLET 10 
240. SINAREST NEW 500/10/2 MG TABLET 15 
241. SKINLITE 2/0.1/0.025 % CREAM 25 GM 
242. SOMPRAZ D 30/40 MG CAPSULE 15 
243. SPASMO PROXYVON PLUS 10/325/50 MG CAPSULE 8 
244. SPEGRA 50/200/25 MG TABLET 30 
245. STAMLO 5 MG TABLET 30 
246. STAMLO BETA 50/5 MG TABLET 15 
247. STEMETIL 5 MG TABLET MD 15 
248. SUCRAFIL O 1000/20 MG GEL 200 ML 
249. SUMO 100/325 MG TABLET 15 
250. SUMO L IV 1000 MG INFUSION 100 ML 
251. SUPRADYN TABLET 15 
252. SYNFLORIX INJECTION 1 
253. T BACT 2 % OINTMENT 15 GM 
254. T BACT 2 % OINTMENT 5 GM 
255. TARGOCID 400 MG INJECTION 1 ML 
256. TAXIM O 200 MG TABLET 10 
257. TAZOMAC 4000/500 MG INJECTION 2 ML 
258. TELEKAST-L 10/5 MG TABLET 15 
259. TELMA 40 MG TABLET 30 
260. TELMA AM 40/5 MG TABLET 15 
261. TELMA H 40/12.5 MG TABLET 15 
262. TELMIKIND 40 MG TABLET 10 
263. TELMIKIND AM 40/5 MG TABLET 10 
264. TELMIKIND H 40/12.5 MG TABLET 10 
265. THROMBOPHOB OINTMENT 20 GM 
266. THYRONORM 100 MCG TABLET 120 
267. THYRONORM 25 MCG TABLET 120 
268. THYRONORM 50 MCG TABLET 120 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
S No. Brand name of the formulation 
269. TOSSEX NEW 4/10 MG SYRUP 100 ML 
270. TRAJENTA 5 MG TABLET 10 
271. TRESIBA FLEXTOUCH 100 IU DISPOSABLE PEN 3 ML 
272. TUSQ DX 5/2/15 MG SYRUP 100 ML 
273. UDILIV 150 MG TABLET 15 
274. UDILIV 300 MG TABLET 15 
275. ULTRACET 325/37.5 MG TABLET 15 
276. UNIENZYME TABLET 15 
277. UNWANTED 72 1.5 MG TABLET 1 
278. UNWANTED KIT 200 MG/200MCG TABLET 1 
279. UPRISE D3 60000 IU CAPSULE 8 
280. URIMAX 0.4 MG CAPSULE 20 
281. URIMAX D 0.4/0.5 MG TABLET 15 
282. URSOCOL 300 MG TABLET 15 
283. VARILRIX INJECTION 0.5 ML 
284. VELOZ D 30/20 MG CAPSULE SR 10 
285. VELPANAT 400/100 MG TABLET 28 
286. VERTIN 16 MG TABLET 15 
287. VOLINI 1.16 % SPRAY 40 GM 
288. VORIER 200 MG TABLET 4 
289. VOVERAN SR 100 MG TABLET SR 15 
290. VYMADA 24/26 MG TABLET 14 
291. WYSOLONE 10 MG TABLET DT 15 
292. WYSOLONE 5 MG TABLET DT 15 
293. XONE 1000 MG INJECTION 5 ML 
294. ZAVICEFTA 2000/500 MG VIAL 10 ML 
295. ZEDEX 4/5/50 MG SYRUP 100 ML 
296. ZERODOL P 100/325 MG TABLET 10 
297. ZERODOL SP 100/325/15 MG TABLET 10 
298. ZIFI 200 MG TABLET 10 
299. ZORYL-M 2/500 MG TABLET 20 
300. ZOSTUM 1000/500 MG INJECTION 1.] 

1128[SCHEDULE I 
(Omited] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 

1129[SCHEDULE J 
(See rule 106) 

DISEASES AND AILMENTS (BY WHATEVER NAME DESCRIBED) 
WHICH A DRUG MAY NOT PURPORT TO PREVENT OR CURE OR 
MAKE CLAIMS TO PREVENT OR CURE. 

1. AIDS 
2. Angina Pectoris 
3. Appendicitis 
4. Arteriosclerosis 
5. Baldness 
6. Blindness 
7. Bronchial Asthma 
8. Cancer and Benign tumour 
9. Cataract 
10. Change in colour of the hair and 
growth of new hair. 
11. Change of foetal sex by drugs. 
12. Congenital malformations 
13. Deafness 
14. Diabetes 
15. Diseases and disorders of uterus. 
16. Epilepticfits and psychiatric 
disorders 
17. Encephalitis 
18. Fairness of the skin 
19. Form, structure of breast 
20. Gangrene 
21. Genetic disorders 
22. Glaucoma 
23. Goitre 
24. Hernia 
25. High/low Blood Pressure 
26. Hydrocele 
27. Insanity 
28. Increase in brain cap acity and 
improvement of memory 
29. Improvement in height of 
children/adults 
30. mprovement in size and shape of 
the sexual organ and in duration of 
sexual performance 
31. improvement in the strength of the 
natural teeth 
32. Improvement in vision 
33. Jaundice/Hepatitis/Liverdisorders 
34. Leukaemia 
35. Leucoderma 
36. Maintenance or improvement of 
capacity of the human being for 
sexual pleasure. 
37. Mental retardation, subnormalities 
and growth 
38. Myocardial infarction 
39. Obesity 
40. Paralysis 
41. Parkinsonism 
42. Piles and Fistulae 
43. Power to rejuvenate 
44. Premature ageing 
45. Premature greying of hair 
46. Rheumatic Heart diseases 
47. Sexual Im potence, Premature 
ejaculation and spermatorrhoea 
48. Spondylitis 
49. Stammering 
50. Stones in gall -bladder, kidney, 
bladder 
51. Varicose vein] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 

SCHEDULE K 
(See rule 123) 
 Class of Drugs Extent and Conditions of Exemptions 
1. Drugs falling under clause (b)(i) of section 3 
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, not intended 
for medicinal use. 

All the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
the rules thereunder, subject to the conditions 
that the drug is not sold for medicinal use or for 
use in the manufacture o f medicines and that 
each container is labelled conspicuously with 
the words "NOT FOR MEDICINAL USE". 
2. 1130[***] 
1131[2A.Quinine and other antimalarial drugs.] 

1132[Persons selling the drugs by retail under 
arrangements made by State Government for 
sale and distribution of the drugs will be 
exempted from the requirements to take out 
licences for retail sale under clause (c) of 
section 18 of the Act.] 

3.1133[*** 
4. ***] 
1134[5. Drugs supplied by a registered medical 
practitioner to his own patient or any drug 
specified in Schedule C supplied by a 
registered medical practitioner at the request of 
another such p ractitioner if it is specially 
prepared with reference to the condition and 
for the use of an individual patient provided 
the registered medical practitioner is not (a) 
keeping an open shop or (b) selling across the 
counter or (c) engaged in the importatio n, 
manufacture, distribution or sale of drugs in 
India to a degree which render him liable to the 
provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the 
rules thereunder.] 
All the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
the rules made thereunder, subject to the 
following conditions:— 
1134[(1) The drugs shall be purchased only from 
a dealer or a manufacturer licensed under these 
rules, and records of such purchases showing 
the names and quantities of such drugs, 
together with their batch num bers and names 
and addresses of the manufacturers shall be 
maintained. Such records shall be open to 
inspection by an Inspector appointed under the 
Act, who may, if necessary, make enquiries 
about purchases of the drugs and may also take 
samples for test.] 
(2) In the case of medicine containing a 
substance specified in 1135[Schedule G, H or X] 
the following additional conditions shall be 
complied with:— 
(a) the medicine shall be labelled with the 
name and address of the regist ered medical 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
practitioner by whom it is supplied; 

(b) If the medicine is for external 
application, it shall be labelled with the 
words 1136[***] "For external use only" or, 
if it is for internal use with the dose; 

(c) the name of the medicine or 
ingredients of the preparation and the 
quantities thereof, the dose prescribed, the 
name of the patient and the date of supply 
and the name of the person who gave the 
prescription shall be entered at the time of 
supply in register to be maintained for the 
purpose; 

(d) the entry in the register shall be given 
a number and that number shall be entered 
on the label of the container; 

(e) the register and the prescription, if 
any, on which the medicines are issued 
shall be prese rved for not less than two 
years from the date of the last entry in the 
register or the date of the prescription, as 
the case may be. 

1137[(3) The drug will be stored under proper 
storage conditions as directed on the label.] 

1138[(4) No drug shall be supplied or dispensed 
after the date of expiration of potency recorded 
on its container, label or wrapper or in violation 
of any statement or direction recorded on such 
container, label or wrapper.] 
1139[5A. Drugs supplied by a hospital or 
 dispensary maintained or supported 
Government or local body 1140[***] 

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
the Rules thereunder which req uire them to be 
covered by a sale licence, subject to the 
following conditions : 

(1) The dispensing and supply of drugs shall be 
carried out by or under the supervision of a 
qualified person; 

(2) The premises where drugs are supplied or 
stocked shall b e open to inspection by an 
Inspector appointed under the Drugs and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Cosmetics Act who can, if necessary, take 
samples for test; 

(3) The drugs shall be stored under proper 
storage conditions. 

1141[(4) The drugs shall be purcha sed from a 
manufacturer or a dealer licensed under these 
rules or received as transferred stocks from 
hospital stores for distribution. Records of such 
purchases or receipts shall be maintained.] 

1142[(5) No drug shall be supp lied or dispensed 
after the date of expiration of potency recorded 
on its container, label or wrapper or in violation 
of any statement or direction recorded on such 
container, label or wrapper.] 

1143[5B. Whole Human Blood IP and / or its 
components stored for transfusion by a First 
Referral Unit, Community Health Centre, 
Primary Health Centre and a Hospital. 

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
the rules made thereunder which require 
obtaining of a licen ce for operatio n of a 
1144[blood centre] or processing Whole Human 
Blood and / or its components, subject to the 
following conditions, namely: - 
(1) The First Referral Unit, Community Health 
Centre, Primary Health Centre and / or any 
Hospital shall be approved by the State / Union 
Territory Licensing Authority after satisfying 
the conditions and facilities through inspection. 
(2) 1145[***] 

(3) The Whole Human Blood and/or its 
components shall be procured only fro m 
Government 1146[Blood centre] and/or Indian 
Red Cross Society Blood Bank and/or 
Regional Blood Transfusion Centre duly 
licensed. 

(4) The approval shall be valid for a period of 
two years from the date of issue unless soone r 
suspended or cancelled and First Referral Unit, 
Community Health Centre, Primary Health 
Centre or the Hospital shall apply for renewal 
to the State Licensing Authority three months 
prior to the date of expiry of the approval. 

(5) The First Referral Un it, Community 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Health Centre, Primary Health Centre and/or 
any Hospital shall have the following technical 
staff for storage of blood or its components:— 
(a) A trained Medical Officer for proper 
procurement, storage and cross matching 
of blood and/or its co mponents. He/ she 
shall also be responsible for identifying 
haemolysed blood and ensure non -supply 
of date expired blood or its components. 
(b) A 1146[blood centre] Technician with the 
qualification and experience as specified 
in Part XII B of Schedule F or an 
experienced laboratory technician trained 
in blood grouping and cross matching. 

(6) The First Refere ral Unit, Community 
Health Centre, Primary Health Centre and 
Hospital shall have an area of 10 sq. meters. It 
shall be wel l lighted, clean and preferably air -
conditioned. 1146[Blood Centre] refrigerator of 
appropriate capacity fitted with alarm device 
and temperature indicator with regular 
temperature monitoring shall be provided to 
store blood units between 2°C to 8°C and if the 
components are proposed to be stored 
specialised equipments as specified in Part XII 
B of Schedule F shall also be provided. 

(7) The First Referral Unit, Community 
Health Centre, Primary Health Centre and 
Hospital shall maintain records and registers 
including details of procurement of Whole 
Human Blood I.P. and/or blood components, 
as required under Part XII B of Schedule F. 

(8) The First Referral Unit, Community Health 
Centre, Primary Health Centre and Hospital 
shall store samples of donors blood as well as 
patients sera for a period of seven days after 
transfusion.] 
1147[6.* * *] 
7.Quinine Sulphate 

The provisions of sub -section (a) (i) of Section 
18 of the Act to the following extent- 
(i) the colour of the drug may be pink, owiing 
to its being coloured with an edible pink 
colouring matter; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(ii) the B.P. tests for readily carbonisable 
substances produce a yellow colour of an 
intensity about four times the colour produced 
with quinin e sulphate conforming to the B.P. 
standard; 
(iii) other Cinchona alkaloids present shall 
not exceed six per cent; and 
(iv) the residue on incineration shall not 
exceed 0.14 per cent. 
1148[8.* * *] 

1149[9. Magnesium Sulphate. The provisions of sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of 
Section 18 of the Act to the following extent:- 
 Chlorides present in the salt shall not 
exceed 0.12 per cent in the case of the produce 
prepared from sea water.] 
1150[10.The following substances which are used 
both as articles of food as well as drugs: 
(i) all condensed or powdered milk whether 
pure, skimmed or malted, fortified with 
vitamins and minerals or otherwise. 
(ii) Farex, Oats, 1151[***] and all other 
similar cereal preparations whether fortified 
with vitamins or otherwise excepting those 
for parenteral use. 
(iii) Virol, Bovril, Chicken essence and all 
other similar predigested foods. 
1152[(iv) Ginger, Pepper, Cumin, Cinnamon 
and all other similar spices and condiments 
unless they are specially labelled as 
conforming to the standards in the Indian 
Pharmacopoeia or the Official 
Pharmacopoeias and official compendia of 
drug standards prescribed under the Act and 
rules made thereunder.]] 
All provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the 
Rules thereunder 
1153[11.* * *] 
1154[12. Substances intended to be used for 
destruction of vermin or insects which cause 
disease in human beings or animals, vis. 
Insecticides and Disinfectants. 
The provision of Chapter IV of the Act and 
Rules thereunder, which require them to be 
covered by a sale licence 1155[subject to the 
condition that provision of condition (17) of 
Rule 65 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 
1945 are complied with by the person 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
stocking or selling such substances.] 
1156[13. The following household remedie s, 
namely:— 
1157[(1) Aspirin tablets] 
1158[(2) Paracetamol Tablets] 
(3) Analgesic Balms. 
(4) Antacid preparations. 
(5) Gripe Water for use of infants. 
(6) Inhalers, co ntaining drugs for tre atment of 
cold and nasal congestion. 
(7) Syrups, lozenges, pills and tablets for 
cough. 
(8) Liniments for external use. 
(9) Skin ointments and ointments for bums. 
(10) Absorbent cotton wool, bandages absorbent 
gauze and adhesive plaster. 
(11) Castor Oil, Liquid Paraffin and Epsom salt. 
(12) Eucalyptus Oil. 
(13) Tincture Iodine, Tincture Benzoin Co. and 
Mercurochrome in containers not 
exceeding 100 ml. 
(14) Tablets of Quinine Sulphate I.P. 
(15) Tablets of lodochlorohydroxy quinoline — 
250 mg.] 

 The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
rules thereunder, which require them to be 
covered with a sale licence in Form 20A 
subject to the following conditions:— 
(a) The drugs are sold only in a village having 
population of not more than one thousand 
persons and where there is no licensed dealer 
under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act. 
(b) The drugs do not cont ain any substance 
specified in 1159[Schedules G, H or X.] 
(c) The drugs are sold in the original unopened 
containers of the licensed manufacturers. 
(d) When the drugs are sold under clause (a) 
condition 3 under "Conditions of licence" of 
Form 20-B shall not apply. 

1160[14. Mechanical Contraceptives 
The provisions of Chapter IV of the Ac t and 
rules thereunder, which require them t o be 
covered by a sale licence 1161[subject to the 
condition that the provisions of condition 
(17) of Rule 65 of the Drugs Rules, 1945, are 
complied with by the person stocking or 
selling mechanical contraceptives.] 

1162[14A. Vaginal contraceptive pessaries 
containing Nonoxynol. 

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
the rules made thereunder which require 
them to be covered by a sale licence subje ct 
to the condition that the provisions of clause 
(17) of rule 65 of the Drugs Rules, 1945 are 
complied with by the person stocking or 
selling this contraceptive.] 
1163[15.Chemical contraceptive having the 
following composition per tablet: 
(1) DL-Norgestrel — 0.30 mg. 
Ethinyloestradiol — 0.30 mg. 
(2) Levonorgestrel — 0.15 mg. 
Ethinyloestradiol — 0.03 mg. 
(3) Centchroman — 30 mg. 
1164[(4) Desogestrel — 0.150 mg. 
The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
the rules made thereunder which required 
them to be covered by a sale licence.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Ethinyloestradiol - 0.030 mg. 
(5) Levonorgestrel — 0.1 mg. 
Ethinyloestradiol — 0.02 mg.] 
1165[16. ***] 
1166[17. Ophthalmic ointments of the Tetracycline 
group of drugs. 
Persons authorised by the Government to 
distribute or sell the drugs under the National 
Trachoma Control Programme shall be 
exempted from the provisions of Chapter IV 
of the Act and the rules made thereunder, 
which require the drugs to be covered by a 
sale licence.] 
1167[18.* * *] 
1168[19.Hair Fixers, namely mucilagenous 
preparations containing gums, used by men for 
fixing beard. 

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
the rules thereunder.] 

1169[20. Radio Pharmaceuticals. All the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act 
and the Rules made thereunder.] 

1170[21. Tablets of Chloroquine Salts. The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
rules thereunder, which require them to be 
covered by a sale licence, provided the drug 
in strip pack is sold under the Commercial 
Distribution Scheme of the National Malaria 
Eradication Programme and duly labelled as 
"National Malaria Eradication Programme—
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
Government of India."] 

1171[22. Sales form restaurant cars of trains and 
from coastal ships of household remedies, which 
do not require the supervision of a qualified 
person for their sale. 
The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
rules thereunder which require them to be 
covered by a sale licence, subject to be 
following conditions namely:— 

(a) The records of purchase and s ale of 
drugs shall be maintained by the person -in-
charge of sale of such drugs, which shall be 
available for inspection by an Inspector 
appointed under the Act; 

(b) T he place where such drugs are stocked 
shall be open to inspection by an Inspector 
appointed under the Act who can, if 
necessary, take samples for test.] 

1172[23. Drags supplied by (i) Multipurpose 
Workers attached to Primary Health 
Centres/Sub-Centres, (ii) Community Health 
The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
the rules thereunder, which require them to 
be covered by a sale licence, provided the 
drugs are supplied under the Health or 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Volunteers under the Rural Health Schem e, (iii) 
Nurses, Auxiliary Nurses, Midwives and Lady 
Health Visitors attached to Urban Family 
Welfare Centres/ Primary Health Centres/Sub-
Centres 1173[(iv) Anganwadi Workers; and (v) 
Community Health Officers at Ayushman Bharat 
Health and Wellness Centres.] 

Family Welfare Programme of the Central or 
State Government.] 
1174[24. Homoeopathic medicines supplied by a 
registered Homeopathic medical practitioner to 
his own patient or Homoeopathic medicines 
supplied by a registered Homoeopathic medical 
practitioner at the request of another such 
practitioner provided the registered 
Homoeopathic medical practitioner is not 
(a) keeping an open shop, or 
(b) selling across the counter or, 
(c) engaged in the importation, manufacture, 
distribution or sale of Homoeopathic medicines 
in India to a d egree which renders him liable to 
the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the 
Rules made thereunder. 
All the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act 
and rules made thereunder subject to the 
following conditions:— 

(1) The Homoeopathic medicines shall be 
purchased only from a dealer or a 
manufacturer licensed under the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Rules, 1945. 

(2) The premises where the Homoeopathic 
medicines are stocked shall be open to 
inspection by an Inspector appointed under 
the Act, who may, if necessary, take samples 
for test.] 
1175[25. Preparations applied to human body for the 
purpose of repelling insects like mosquitoes. 

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
rules thereunder which require them to be 
covered by a sal e licence subject to the 
conditions that such a product has been 
manufactured under a valid drug 
manufacturing licence. 
1176[26. Medicated Dressings and Bandages for 
First Aid.] 

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
rules thereunder which require them to be 
covered by a sale licence, subject io the 
conditions that such a product has been 
manufactured under a valid drug 
manufacturing licence.] 
1177[27. 1178[Oral Rehy dration Salts (Manufactured 
as per the following formula): -Composition of the 
formulation in terms of the amount in g, to be 
dissolved in sufficient water to produce 1000 ml. 
• Sodium Chloride 2.6 
• Dextrose (anhydrous) or 13.5 
• Dextrose mono-hydrate 14.85 
• Potassium chloride 1.5 
• Sodium Citrate 2.9] 
The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
rules thereunder which required them to be 
covered by a sale licence, subject to the 
conditions that such a product has been 
manufactured under a valid drug 
manufacturing Licence.] 

1179[28. White or Yellow Petroleum Jelly I.P. (Non- The Provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
the rules made thereunder which require 
them to be covered by a sale licence subject 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
perfumed) 

to the conditions that such a product has 
been manufactured under a valid drug 
manufacturing licence.] 
1180[29. Morphine Tablets The Provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
the rules made thereunder which require 
them to be covered by a sale licence, subject 
to the following conditions, namely:— 

(i) The drug shall be supplied by the 
Palliative Care Centres approved by the 
State Government to terminally ill cancer 
patients. 

(ii) The drug shall be kept under the 
custody of the Medical Officer -in-charge of 
the said Centre. 

(iii) The drug shall be purchased from a 
dealer or a manufacturer who holds licence 
under these rules, and records of such 
purchases showing the names and quantities 
together with their batch numbers, and 
names and addresses of the manufacturers or 
dealers and the names and addresses of the 
patients to whom supplies have been made 
shall be maintained. Such records shall be 
open to inspection by an Inspector appointed 
under the Act, who may also take samples 
for test. 
30. Whole Human Blood collected and transfused 
by Centres run by Armed Forces Medical 
Services in border areas, small mid -zonal 
hospitals including peripheral hospitals, Field 
Ambulances, Mobile medical units including 
blood supply units in border, sensitive and field 
areas. 
All the pro visions of Chapter IV of the Act 
and rules made thereunder which require 
them to be covered by a licence to operate a 
1181[Blood Centre] for collection, storage 
and processing of whole human blood for 
sale or distribution subjec t to the following 
conditions:— 

(i) These Centres shall collect, process and 
transfuse blood in emergent situations which 
require life saving emergency surgeries/or 
transfusion. 

(ii) The Centres shall be under the 
active direction and personal supervision 
 of a qualified Medical Officer, 
possessing the qualifications and experiences 
specified in condition (i) of rule 122G. 

(iii) Each blood unit shall be tested 
before use for freedom from HIV I and II 
antibodies, Hepatit is B surface antigen, 
malarial parasites and other tests specified 
under the monograph "Whole Human 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Blood" in current edition of Indian 
Pharmacopoeia. 

(iv) These Centres shall have adequate 
infrastructure facilities for storage and 
transportation of blood. 

(v) The blood collected and tested by such 
Centres shall be transfused by the Centre 
itself and may be made available for use of 
other peripheral Armed Forces hospitals or 
centres during operational circumstances.] 
1182[31. Homoepathic Medicines The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act 
and the rules made thereunder which relates 
to sale licence in Form 20C, subject to the 
following conditions:— 
(i) These medicines shall be sold in the 
original sealed small quantity packings 
of the licensed manufacturers; 

(ii) Medicines shall be stocked and sold by 
retail dealers of medicines licensed 
under rule 61; 

(iii) Medicines shall be stored separately 
from other allopathic drugs; 

(iv) Medicines shall be purchased fron t a 
manufacturer or a dealer licensed under 
these rules; and 

(v) Purchase and sale records of medicines 
shall be maintained by the dealer for a 
minimum period of three years.] 

1183[32. First Aid kit supplied along with mot or 
vehicle by the manufacturer or its distributor at the 
time of first sale of vehicle. 

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
rules made thereunder which require them to 
be covered by a sale licence, subject to the 
condition that the drug items are procured 
from a manufacturer or a dealer licensed 
under the rules.] 

1184[33. Nicotine gum 1185[and Lozenges] 
containing upto 2 mg. of nicotine 

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
the Rules made thereunder which require 
them to be covered by a sale licence subject 
to the condition that such a product has been 
manufactured under a valid drug 
manufacturing licence.] 

1186[34. Production of Oxygen 93 per cent. USP or 
Oxygen 93 per cent. IP, produced from air by the 
molecular sieve process or Oxygen 93 per cent, 
The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
the rules made ther eunder which require 
them to be covered by manufacturing licence 
under the rules, provided that the production 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
supplied from liquid Oxygen, by a hospital or 
medical institute for their captive consumption. 

facilities shall be open to inspections by an 
Inspector appointed under the Act, who can, 
if necessary, take samples for test.] 

1187[35. Homeopathic hair oils having active 
ingredients up to 3X potency only. 
The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
the rules made thereunder which require 
them to be regulated with a sale license 
subject to the condition that such pr oducts 
have been manufactured under a valid 
manufacturing license and sold in the 
original sealed packing of the licensed 
manufacturers. 

36. Custom made devices. All provisions of Chapter IV of the Act 
and the rules made thereunder, subject to the 
condition that the device being specifically 
made in accordance with a duly qualified 
medical practitioner's written prescription 
under his responsibility, in accordance with 
specific design, characteristics and the same 
is intended for the sole use of a particular 
patient and the label contain the words 
'custom made device' . 
Explanation.—Mass produced devices, 
which only need adoption to meet the 
specific requirement of a medical 
practitioner or any other professional user, 
shall not be considered as custom made 
device. 

37. Zinc sulphate tablets and oral solutions having 
10 mg and 20 mg of elemental zinc. 

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
rules thereunder which require them to be 
covered by a sale licence, subject to the 
condition that suc h a product has been 
manufactured under a valid drug 
manufacturing licence.] 

1188[38. Sterile solutions intended for parenteral 
administration with 100 ml in one container of the 
finished dosage form for single use manufacture d 
for export only. 

The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
rules made thereunder which require them to 
obtain a licence in Form 28D or 28DA from 
the Central Licence Approving Authority 
subject to the condition that such drugs have 
been manufactured fo r export purpose only 
under a licence granted by the State 
Licensing Authority.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1334[39. Liquid Antiseptics for household use The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and 
rules made thereunder, which require them 
to be covered with a sale license in Form 20 
or Form 20A, subject to the following 
conditions, namely:─ 
(a) The drugs are manufactured by licensed 
manufacturers; 
(b) the drugs do not contain any substance 
specified in Schedule G, H, H1 or X; 
(c) the drugs are sold in the original 
unopened containers of the licensed 
manufacturer; 
(d) the drugs are purchased from a licensed 
wholesaler or a licensed manufacturer.] 

 1337[Provided that the condition specified 
in clause (d) shall not be a pplicable for the 
drugs manufactured on or before the 30th 
November, 2022.] 

1189[***] 
1190[SCHEDULE L-I 
(See rules 74, 78 and 150E) 
GOOD LABORATORY PRACTICES AND REQUIREMENT OF 
PREMISES AND EQUIPMENTS 
1. General Requirements: 
(a) The laboratory or the organisation of which it is a part must be an 
entity that is legally authorised to function and can be held legally 
responsible. 
(b) It is the responsibility of the management to ensure that the 
laboratory carry out its testing, calibration, validation, and all other 
technical activities in such a way as to meet Good Laboratory Practices 
(GLP) requirements. 
(c) Laboratory management shall have a qualified individual to be 
known as quality manag er or technical manager for carrying out all 
technical activities and for the implementation of documented quality 
system and shall report to the top management directly. 
(d) The quality manager shall prepare a schedule for technical audit of 
the laboratory for GLP compliance by an expert or experts appointed by 
the top-management other than the in -charge of the laboratory and shall 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
ensures the maintenance of documented quality system as per quality, 
manual. 
2. Premises: 
(a) (i) the laboratories shall be designed, constructed and maintained 
so as to prevent entry of insects and rodents besides cross 
contamination; 
(ii) interior surface (walls, floor, and ceilings) shall be smooth 
and free from cracks, and permit easy cleaning and 
disinfection; 
(iii) adequate provision is made not only for space and equipment 
for carrying out necessary test but also for utilities like water, 
power and gas; 
(iv) air ventilation system shall ensure dust free environment. 
(b) The laboratories shall be provided wi th adequate lighting and 
ventilation and if necessary, air -conditioning to maintain satisfactory 
temperature and relative humidity that will not adversely affect the testing 
and storage of drugs or the accuracy of the functioning of the laboratory 
equipments or instruments. 
(c) The drainage system facilities shall be such as to facilitate proper 
maintenance and prevent water logging in the laboratory. 
(d) Tabletops shall be constructed with acid, alkali and solvent resistant 
material and shall be smooth and free from crevices as far as possible. 
(e) All bio -medical laboratory waste shall be destroyed as per the 
provisions of the Bio-Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 
1996. 
(f) Adequate space with proper storage conditions in the labor atory 
shall be provided for keeping reference and working standards and be 
maintained by the quality control department. Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) for the maintenance of reference standards and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
evaluation of Working and Secondary standards shall b e prepared by the 
laboratory. 
(g) The air circulation is maintained in the area where sterility test is 
carried out as per Schedule 'M', 
(h) Bio-burden shall be routinely maintained in the controlled and 
uncontrolled area. (e.g., air locks) 
(i) Animal House: 
(i) Animal House shall have the approval of the Committee for 
the Purpose of Control and Supervision on Experiments on 
Animals (CPCSEA). 
(ii) Designed in such a way that there is an arrangement to 
quarantine the new animals procured or pu rchased and have a 
provision for clean corridor and dirty corridor. 
(iii) In case of a diseased animal proper diagnosis shall be done 
and proper record of treatment shall be maintained. 
(iv) Different types of animals shall be housed separately with 
proper identification. 
(v) A Standard Operating Procedure shall be prepared for 
breeding and care of animals, maintenance, cleaning or sanitation 
with suitable schedule for cleaning of animal cages, racks, floor 
and other equipments. 
(vi) The animal house shall have proper air -conditioning 
(temperature and humidity) with proper lighting and be monitored 
regularly and documented periodically. 
3. Personal: 
(a) Staff iii the laboratory shall possess necessary qualification, proper 
training and shall have adequate, experience for the assigned duties. 
(b) A training record of all the personnel shall be maintained. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(c) Head of the laboratory must be of high professional standing with 
experience in drug analysis and laboratory management who is 
responsible for— 
(i) ensuring the control and maintenance of documents including 
the quality system as per the requirements of regulatory authorities 
which involves all raw data, SOPs, documentation exhibits, 
protocols, training charts, etc; 
(ii) planning and organising the audit of the quality system and 
initiation as well as follow up action of the corrective actions, if 
any; 
(iii) investigation of technical complaints; 
(iv) taking final responsibilities for recommending any regulatory 
action in the event of non-compliance of tested samples. 
4. Equipments: 
(a) The laboratory shall be furnished with all types of equipments as 
may be necessary for carrying out the different activities within the 
laboratory. 
(b) The analytical instruments shall be housed in dust -tree environment 
and whenever required, conditions of temperature and humidity 
shall be maintained and periodic checks on temperature and 
humidity be made and recorded. 
(c) The instruments, instrument bench and surrounding areas s hall be 
kept clean and tidy at all times, 
(d) Instruments requiring calibration shall be calibrated at regular 
intervals and records of such calibration or maintenance be 
maintained and there shall be written instructions in the form of 
Standard Operating Procedures for the operation, maintenance and 
calibration of instruments. 
(e) Equipment records shall be maintained and such records shall 
contain the following:— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(i) name of equipment or machine or apparatus; 
(ii) manufacturer's name, model nu mber and type of 
identification; 
(iii) serial number; 
(iv) date on which equipment was received in laboratory; 
(v) current location; 
(vi) condition when received (e.g., new, used, re-conditioned); 
(vii) copy of the manufacturer's operating instructions; 
(viii) frequency of calibration; 
(ix) frequency of maintenance; 
(x) log Book ( day-to-day entry including status of the equipment) 
(xi) staff responsible for monitoring the calibration and 
maintenance status of the equipment; 
(xii) calibrating records; 
(xiii) list of authorised users or operators, if any; 
(xiv) history of any damage, malfunction, modification or 
upgradation, repair and calibration; 
(xv) list of spares and accessories, if any. 
(f) A progress register f or non -functional equipments and action for 
procurement of spares and accessories, monitoring thereof, shall be 
maintained. 
(g) A Standard Operating Procedure for preventive maintenance of 
machine or equipment or apparatus shall be prepared by the 
laboratory. 
(h) Other equipments such as burettes, pipettes, volumetric flasks, 
weight boxes, thermometers, etc., shall be thoroughly checked for 
accuracy of calibration before acceptance for use. 
(i) Maintenance procedure in the form of Standard Operatin g 
Procedures must be prepared and regular servicing must be 
performed by the maintenance engineer or specialist. 
(j) Equipments, instruments giving anomalous results or defective must 
be labeled as 'out-of-order' till they are repaired and after instrument 
is repaired it should be calibrated before use. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(k) The maintenance of equipments for services like electricity, gas, 
water, steam, and compressed gas shall be handled by competent 
person. 
(1) Autoclaves must meet the requirements described for operations , 
safety and validation procedures, and the validation carried out by 
the laboratory shall be recorded. 
(m) Fume Cupboards. Work involving the evolution of harmful and 
obnoxious vapours shall be carried out in a fume cupboard. The 
exhaust system of the fume cupboard shall be checked frequently to 
ensure that it is in order. There should be a water drainage system 
inside the fume cupboard and shall be checked frequently to ensure 
that there is no water logging and it is in order. 
5. Chemicals and Reagents: 
(a) The storage and handling of chemicals and reagents shall be done in 
a manner considering the physicochemical properties of these 
substances and the hazards involved in their use. 
(b) All reagents and solutions in the laboratory shall be propert y 
identified with a label. 
(c) A standardisation register shall be maintained by the laboratory 
along with its raw data and Standard Operating Procedure for 
preparation and standardisation on stock solutions, standard 
solutions, volumetric solutions must be prepared for the guidance of 
staff. 
(d) Containers of stock solutions and of standard solutions shall bear the 
following details:— 
(i) name of analytical chemist who prepared the solution; 
(ii) date of preparation; 
(iii) Each volumetric solu tion shall have "use before date" 
depending upon the stability of the solution; and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(iv) standardisation records. 
(e) The transfer of hazardous chemicals and regents from one container 
to another container shall be carried out with suitable equipment by 
taking the care of safety and no make -shift or hazardous methods 
must be resorted to. 
6. Good house keeping and safety: 
(a) General and specific written down instructions for safety shall be 
circulated to each staff member and the instructions be revised 
periodically as appropriate (e.g., poster displays, audio -visual 
material and by seminars/conferences). 
(b) Standard Operating Procedure for safety, house -keeping and loss 
prevention shall be prepared in accordance with the various rules, 
and r egulations of the Government of India and include the 
following requirements, namely:— 
(i) safety data sheets must be made available to staff before testing 
is carried out; 
(ii) drinking, eating and smoking shall riot be permitted in the 
laboratories; f ood for human consumption shall not be kept in 
working or storage areas; food meant for test animals shall be 
handled by the workers under the guidance of a veterinary doctor or 
qualified person. In the animal house, the facilities for collection 
and dispo sal of animal waste or safe sanitary storage of waste 
before removal from testing be provided; 
(iii) staff must wear laboratory coats or other protective clothing 
including gloves and face masks and eye protection wherever 
required; 
(iv) the laborato ries shall have adequate first aid kit and fire 
fighting equipments located at the right places and the staff must be 
familiar and trained with the use of fire fighting equipment 
including fire extinguishers, fire blankets and gas masks; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(v) operators c arrying out sterility tests shall wear sterilised 
garments including headgear, face masks and shoes; 
(vi) the staff must be educated in the first aid techniques, 
emergency care and use of antidotes; and 
(vii) safety rules in handling cylinders of com pressed gases must 
be observed and staff must be familiar with relevant colour 
identification codes; 
(c) Protective precautions to be taken in Laboratories— 
(i) water showers shall be installed at appropriate places in the 
laboratory; 
(ii) rubber suc tion bulbs must be used on manual pipettes and 
siphons; 
(iii) warnings, precautions, and written instructions must be given 
for work with violent, uncontrollable or dangerous reactions (e.g., 
mixing water and acids, biological such as infectious agents, etc.); 
(iv) appropriate facilities for the collection, storage, and disposal 
of wastes shall be made available; 
(v) staff must be aware of methods for safe disposal of corrosive 
or dangerous products by neutralisation or deactivation and of the 
need for complete disposal of mercury and its salts; 
(vi) staff must also be aware about the safety precautions to be 
adopted while handling potassium cyanide and cyanogen bromide; 
(vii) a Standard Operating Procedure for handling, collection, 
disposal of chemical and biological wastes be prepared. 
7. Maintenance, calibration and validation of equipments: 
(a) All equipments, instruments and other devices used in the laboratory 
shall use appropriate methods and procedures for all tests or 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
calibrations and they shall be regularly calibrated and validated. The 
frequency of calibration may differ from instrument to instrument. 
(b) The original equipment manufacturer's recommendations along with 
the experience of the laboratory staff and the use of equ ipment per 
day may also be considered while fixing the frequency of 
calibration. 
(c) For most of the equipments and instruments, Standard Operating 
Procedures for calibration and calibration schedule be prepared by 
the laboratory and a logbook shall als o be prepared by each 
laboratory for proper documentation of calibration results. 
8. Reference materials: 
(a) Reference materials are necessary for the testing and, or calibration, 
validation or verification of a sample or of equipment, instruments 
or other devices and all such materials shall be traceable to agency 
authorised by Government of India or any other International body. 
(b) The laboratory shall prepare working standard by comparing with 
the reference standards and shall be routinely checke d for their 
purity by selecting parameters such as identity, loss on drying or on 
water, impurity and assay, etc. 
(c) Whenever, any new reference material is received by the laboratory, 
a code number shall be assigned and this code number shall be 
quoted on the laboratory note book and analytical work sheet. The 
working standard shall also be provided with identification code. 
(d) A register pertaining to reference and working materials must be 
maintained by the laboratory. The following details may b e 
mentioned in the register:— 
(i) source of supply; 
(ii) code number of the reference material; 
(iii) date of receipt; 
(iv) batch number or identification number of the supplying 
agency; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(v) details like assay value, water content or any other information 
provided; 
(vi) storage condition of the material; and 
(vii) date of expiry, if any and date of manufacturing if possible. 
(e) All working standards shall be checked at appropriate intervals or 
before use to ensure that it has not de teriorated or decomposed 
during storage. These observations be recorded in a register. All the 
reference and working standards shall be stored at appropriate 
storage condition; those requiring storage between 2 -8°C shall be 
stored in a refrigerator. Wherev er recommended the material may 
not be allowed to be frozen. 
9. Microbiological Cultures: 
(a) Standard Operating Procedure for maintenance of microbial culture 
and subculture must be prepared by the laboratories. 
(b) If the cultures have become no n-viable or mutant, proper procedure 
shall be followed to destroy these cultures by autoclaving under an 
authorised personnel for biological testing. Preferably not more than five 
passages may be prepared. 
(c) All activities be carried out in a aseptic area by authorised person. 
(d) The laboratories shall perform standard biochemical tests on the 
sub-culture as given in literature to ensure their viability, 
10. Quality system: 
The quality system shall be designed to ensure the following objectives:— 
(a) the measurements and calibrations shall fully conform to the 
compendial requirements and the methods demonstrably based on 
validation protocols are followed; 
(b) it shall be effective in providing necessary assurance that the 
activities or proc esses or techniques or practices comply with 
planned arrangements; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(c) it helps in early detection and correction of non-conformities; 
(d) remedial action on the observations by internal and external audits 
are taken appropriately; and 
(e) it shall have a documented quality policy for the organisation. 
11. Internal quality system audits: 
(a) Internal audits are done to assure the integrity of the analysis and 
such audits shall be conducted periodically with a predetermined 
schedule and procedur e with appropriate checklist, to verify that the 
operations continue to comply with the requirements of quality system 
and requirements of regulator authorities. Internal quality audits shall be 
carried out by trained and qualified personnel who are indepe ndent of the 
activity to be audited. 
(b) The periodicity of quality audit shall be fixed by the Head of the 
laboratory so that each activity is audited at least once in a year. 
(c) Head of the laboratory will be responsible for initiation of the 
corrective action arising from audits and verification of corrective action. 
(d) Whenever any non -compliance or any diversion is noticed by the 
team in implementing quality policy or quality system, protocols, the 
same will be attended by the Quality Manage r. The problem will be 
analysed and necessary actions will be taken with proper documentation. 
(e) The Quality Manager shall maintain all the records of the analysis 
being conducted which includes test system, the type of analysis, date on 
which analysi s, is done, etc., and quality Manager shall also maintain 
copies of all protocols pertaining to different activities being checked by 
the audit team. 
12. Management review: 
Quality system reviews shall be conducted by the top management atleast 
once in every twelve months and the agenda of review shall generally 
cover the following:— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(i) report or input of internal audits; 
(ii) matter arising from previous reviews; 
(iii) report of external audits, if any; 
(iv) surveillance report, if any; 
(v) result of proficiency testing; 
(vi) complaints or feedback received from users of laboratory 
services; 
(vii) details of in-house quality control checks; 
(viii) need of amendment of the quality system and 
documentation; 
(ix) induction training of new staff; and 
(x) any other requirements of the laboratory. 
13. Standard Operating Procedures: 
(a) Standard Operating Procedures are written procedures for different 
activities being conducted in a laboratory and shall include the following 
characteristics:— 
(i) they shall be written in a chronological order listing different 
steps leading to an analysis of drugs or calibration of an 
instrument; 
(ii) testing laboratories shall have Standard Operative Procedure 
manuals and have its periodic review; 
(iii) it shall be user friendly documents and shall include 
designation of the person responsible for intended activity. 
(b) Standard Operating Procedures in addition to those recommended 
under various activities shall also be prepared to the minimum in respect of 
the following:— 
(i) sample handling and accountability; 
(ii) receipt identification, storage, mixing and method sampling of 
the test and control articles; 
(iii) record keeping, reporting, storage and retrieval of data; 
(iv) coding of different studies, handling of data including use of 
computerized data system; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(v) operation of technical audit personnel in performing and 
reporting audits, inspections and final report reviews; 
(vi) routine inspection of cleaning, maintenance, testing, 
calibration and standardisation of instruments; 
(vii) action to be taken in respect of equipment failure; 
(viii) analytical data methods; 
(ix) the raw data; 
(x) data handling and storage retrieval; 
(xi) health and safety protection; 
(xii) animal room preparations; 
(xiii) animal care; 
(xiv) storage and maintenance of microbial cultures; 
(xv) maintenance of sterility room (i.e., constant maintenance and 
monitoring of Aseptic condition of sterility room); 
(xvi) use and storage of reference standards; 
(xvii) procurement of stores and equipment; 
(xviii) monitoring of testing of samples; 
(xix) method of retention of unexpended sample, their location, 
maintenance and disposal; 
(xx) document control; 
(xxi) redressal of technical complaints; 
(xxii) housing-keeping; 
(xxiii) corrective and preventive action; 
(xxiv) working procedure (test methods); 
(xxv) calibration Manual; and 
(xxvi) training manual. 
14. Protocols and specifications archive: 
(a) Every laboratory shall have a specification archive and current 
versions of all necessary specifications shall be kept as per the 
requirements of the Act and the rules made thereunder and the National 
Pharmacopoeia (Indian Pharmacopoeia). 
(b) All updates and corrections must be noted in the mas ter volumes of 
Pharmacopoeias to prevent the use of obsolete sections; supplement and 
addendum shall also be made available in the laboratory. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(c) The specification archive shall contain the following:— 
(i) list of all the pharmacopoeias; 
(ii) a file on patent and proprietary medicines (non -
pharmacopoeial) test methods to specifications prepared and 
validated by the manufacturer or by the laboratory itself. The test 
methods shall be submitted to the concerned Drug Control 
Authority. The validated test methods developed by the 
manufacturer or the laboratory shall stand to the requirements of 
compendial parameters in regard to its precision, accuracy, 
reproducibility, specificity, linearity, and ruggedness, etc. 
15. Raw data: 
(a) Raw data refers to the laboratory work sheet, note books or analysis 
sheet, records, memorandum, notes or extract copies thereof that may be 
the results of general observations and other activities and such raw dat a 
shall include hand written notes, photographs, software, drawings, 
computer printouts, spectral charts, dictated observations or recorded data 
from automated equipments. The raw data also includes record on receipt 
of animals, result of environmental mon itoring, calibration, records of 
equipments, integrator output from analytical equipment, including work-
sheet used to read a note, information from Light Emitting Diode (LED) 
display of any equipment. 
(b) A single line shall strike through the data being changed; the correct 
information shall be recorded along with the old data and the reason of 
change. The analyst making the change shall be identified by his 
signature with date. In case of automated data collection system, the 
person responsible shall be identified at the time of data output. The 
original entry must be saved and the system shall have audit trail for all 
the data. 
(c) Data integrity and security shall be maintained and the data shall not 
be accessible to any unauthorised person. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
16. Storage and archival: 
(a) The residual sample shall be retained in proper storage condition, 
for a period of one year after the final report. 
(b) The laboratory must establish and maintain procedures for the 
identification collection, indexing, retrieva l, storage, maintenance, and 
disposal of all quality documents. 
(c) All the raw data, documentation, Standard Operative Procedures, 
protocols, and final reports are to be retained and there shall be archives 
for orderly storage and expeditious retrieval of all raw data, 
documentation, protocols, interim and final report. The archive shall 
provide a suitable environment that will prevent modification, damage, or 
deterioration and/or loss. 
(d) The condition under which the original documents are stored must 
ensure their security and confidentiality. 
(e) Paper documents shall not be kept for long periods under high 
humidity and raw data in the form of tape and discs are to be preserved 
with care. 
(f) In case of storage of only optical disc, the life of disc shall be longer 
than the storage time. 
(g) Raw data on thermal paper might fade away with time; therefore, a 
photocopy of the thermal paper shall also be retained in the archive. 
(h) Time for which records are retained shall be prescribed in the 
document.] 
1191[SCHEDULE M 
[See rules 71, 74, 76 and 78] 
GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES AND REQUIREMENTS OF 
PREMISES, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT FOR PHARMACEUTICAL 
PRODUCTS 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Note.—To achieve the objectives listed below, each licensee shall evolve 
appropriate methodology, systems and procedures which shall be 
documented and maintained for inspection and reference; and the 
manufacturing premises shall be used exclusively for production of drugs 
and no other manufacturing activity shall be undertaken therein. 
PART I 
GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES FOR PHARMACEUTICAL 
PRODUCTS: MAIN PRINCIPLES 

1. Pharmaceutical Quality System (PQS): 
1.1. The manufacturer must assume responsibility for the quality of the 
pharmaceutical products to ensure that they are fit for their intended 
use, comply with the requirements of the licence and do not place 
patients at risk due to inadequate safety, quality or efficacy. The 
attainment of this quality objective is the responsibility of senior 
management and requires the p articipation and commitment of staff in 
different departments and at all levels within the company, the 
company’s suppliers and the distributors. To achieve this quality 
objective reliably there must be a comprehensively designed and 
correctly implemented pharmaceutical quality system incorporating 
Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) and Quality Risk Management 
(QRM). 
1.2. Senior management has the ultimate responsibility to ensure that an 
effective pharmaceutical quality system is in place, is adequately 
resourced, and that roles, responsibilities, and authorities are defined, 
communicated and implemented throughout the organisation. Senior 
management’s leadership and active participation in the pharmaceutical 
quality system is essential. This shall ensure the su pport and 
commitment of staff at all levels and sites within the organisation to the 
pharmaceutical quality system. 
1.3. Quality management is a wide-ranging concept covering all matters that 
individually or collectively influence the quality of a product. It i s the 
totality of the arrangements made with the object of ensuring that 
pharmaceutical products are of the quality required for their intended 
use. Quality management, therefore, incorporates Good Manufacturing 
Practices and other factors, including those outside the scope of this 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Part, such as product design and development. 
1.4. Good Manufacturing Practices applies to the life -cycle stages from the 
manufacture of investigational medicinal products, technology transfer, 
and commercial manufacturing, until the product discontinuation. The 
product quality system can extend to the pharmaceutical development 
life-cycle stages and shall facilitate innovation and continual 
improvement and strengthen the link between pharmaceutical 
development and manufacturing activi ties. All parts of the product 
quality system shall be adequately resourced and maintained, including 
being provided with sufficient competent personnel, suitable premises, 
equipment and facilities. 
1.5. The product quality system appropriate to the manufacture of 
pharmaceutical products shall ensure that— 
(a) product realisation is achieved by designing, qualifying, planning, 
implementing, maintaining and continuously improving a system that 
allows the consistent delivery of products with appropriate quality 
attributes; 
(b) product and process knowledge is managed throughout all lifecycle 
stages; 
(c) pharmaceutical products are designed and developed in a way that 
takes into account, the requirements of GMP and other GXPs such as 
those of Good Laboratory Practices (GLP) and Good Clinical 
Practices (GCP); 
(d) production and quality control operations shall be clearly specified in 
a written form and GMP requirements are adopted; 
(e) managerial responsibilities are clearly specified in the job 
descriptions; 
(f) arrangements are made for th e manufacture, supply and use of the 
correct starting and packaging materials, the selection and monitoring 
of suppliers and for verifying that each delivery is the correct material 
from the approved supply chain; 
(g) all necessary controls on starting materials, intermediate products, and 
bulk products and other in -process controls, calibrations and 
validations are carried out; 
(h) the finished product is correctly processed and checked, according to 
the defined procedures; 
(i) pharmaceutical products are not sold or supplied before the authorised 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
persons have certified that each production batch has been produced 
and controlled in accordance with the requirements of the licence and 
other applicable regulations relevant to the production, control and 
release of pharmaceutical products; 
(j) processes are in place to ensure the management of outsourced 
activities; 
(k) satisfactory arrangements exist to ensure, as far as possible, that the 
pharmaceutical products are stored, distributed and subsequently 
handled so that quality is maintained throughout their shelf-life; 
(l) there is a procedure for self -inspection or quality audit that regularly 
appraises the effectiveness and applicability of the product quality 
system; 
(m) product and processes are monitored and the results taken into 
account in batch release, in the investigation of deviations and, with a 
view to taking preventive action to avoid potential deviations 
occurring in the future; 
(n) arrangements are in place for the prospective evaluation and approval 
of planned changes and their approval prior to their implementation, 
taking into account regulatory notification and approval where 
required. After implementation of any change, an evaluation is 
undertaken to confirm that the quality objectives were achieved and 
that there was no unintended adverse impact on product quality; 
(o) regular reviews of the quality of pharmaceutical products are 
conducted with the objective of verifying the consistency of the 
process and identifying where there is a need for improvement; 
(p) a state of control is e stablished and maintained by developing and 
using effective monitoring and control systems for process 
performance and product quality; 
(q) continual improvement is facilitated through the implementation of 
quality improvements appropriate to the current level of process and 
product knowledge; 
(r) there is a system for QRM; and 
(s) deviations, suspected product defects and other problems are reported, 
investigated and recorded. An appropriate level of root cause analysis 
is applied during such investigations. The most likely root causes 
shall be identified and appropriate corrective and preventive actions 
shall be identified and taken. The effectiveness of corrective and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
preventive actions shall be monitored. 
1.6. There shall be periodic management reviews, with the involvem ent of 
senior management, of the operation of the product quality system to 
identify opportunities for continual improvement of products, processes 
and the system itself. Unless otherwise justified, such reviews shall be 
conducted at least annually. 
1.7. The product quality system shall be defined and documented. A quality 
manual or an equivalent documentation shall be established and shall 
contain a description of the quality management system including 
management responsibilities. 

2. Quality Risk Management (QRM): 
2.1. Quality Risk Management is a systematic process for the assessment, 
control, communication and review of risks to the quality of the 
medicinal product. It can be applied both proactively and 
retrospectively. 
2.2. Quality Risk Management shall ensure that the- 
(a) evaluation of the risk to quality is based on scientific knowledge, 
experience with the process and ultimately links to the protection of 
the patient; 
(b) level of effort, formality and documentation of the QRM process is 
commensurate with the level of risk. 
2.3. Product quality review- 
2.3.1. Regular, periodic or rolling quality reviews of all 
pharmaceutical products, including products for export only, 
shall be conducted with the objective of verifying the 
consistency of the existing process and the appropriateness of 
current specifications for both starting materials and finished 
product, to highlight any trends and to identify product and 
process improvements. 
2.3.2. Such reviews shall normally be conducted and documented 
annually, taking into account previous reviews, and shall 
include at least,- 
(a) review of starting materials and packaging materials used for 
the product, especially those from new sources and in 
particular the review of supply chain traceability of active 
substances; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) a review of critical in -process controls, and finished product 
results; 
(c) a review of all batches that failed to meet established 
specifications and their investigation; 
(d) a review of all significant deviations or non -conformity, the 
related investigations and the effectiveness of resultant 
corrective and preventive actions taken; 
(e) a review of all changes made to the processes or analytical 
methods; 
(f) a review of dossier variations submitted, granted or refused; 
(g) a review of the results of the stability monitoring programme 
and any adverse trends; 
(h) a review of all quality related returns, complaints and recalls 
and the investigations performed at the time; 
(i) a review of adequacy of any other previous corrective actions 
on product processes or equipment; 
(j) post marketing commitments for new dossiers and variations to 
the dossiers; 
(k) the qualification status of relevant equipment and utilities, e.g., 
heating, ventilation and air conditioning, water or compressed 
gases and a review of the results of monitoring the output of 
such equipment and utilities; and 
(l) a review o f technical agreements to ensure that they are up to 
date. 

2.3.3. The manufacturer shall evaluate the results of the review and 
an assessment shall be made as to whether corrective and 
preventive actions or any revalidation shall be undertaken, 
under the product quality system. Corrective and preventive 
actions shall be completed in a timely and effective manner, 
according to documented procedures. There shall be procedures 
for the on -going management and review of these actions, and 
the effectiveness of these pr ocedures shall be verified during 
self-inspection. Quality reviews may be grouped by product 
type e.g., solid dosage forms, liquid dosage forms, or sterile 
products, where scientifically justified. There shall be a 
technical agreement in place between the various parties that 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
defines their respective responsibilities in producing the quality 
review. The authorised person responsible for final batch 
certification shall ensure that the quality review is performed in 
a timely manner and is accurate. 

3. Good manufacturing practices for pharmaceutical products: 
3.1. Good manufacturing practices is that part of quality management 
which ensures that products are consistently produced and controlled 
according to the quality standards appropriate to their intended use as 
required by the conditions of licence, clinical trial permission or product 
specifications. Good manufacturing practices are concerned with both 
production and quality control. Good manufacturing practices are aimed 
primarily at managing and minimising the r isks inherent in 
pharmaceutical manufacture to ensure the quality, safety and efficacy of 
products. Under Good manufacturing practices— 
(1) all manufacturing processes are clearly defined, systematically 
reviewed for associated risks in the light of scientific knowledge and 
experience and shown to be capable of consistently manufacturing 
pharmaceutical products of the required quality that comply with 
their specifications; 
(2) qualification and validation are performed; 
(3) all necessary resources are provided, includi ng the following, 
namely- 
(a) sufficient and appropriately qualified and trained personnel; 
(b) adequate premises and space; 
(c) suitable equipment and services; 
(d) appropriate materials, containers and labels; 
(e) approved procedures and instructions; 
(f) suitable storage and transport; 
(g) adequate personnel, laboratories and equipment are in process 
controls; and 
(h) books necessary for ensuring compliance with the requirements 
relating to product development, manufacturing and quality 
control testing such as the Drugs and Cosmetics A ct, 1940, the 
Drugs Rules, 1945, the Indian Pharmacopoeia (Current Edition) 
and other relevant books and guidance documents officially 
issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
Government of India; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(4) instructions and procedures are written in clea r and unambiguous 
language, specifically applicable to the facilities provided; 
(5) procedures are carried out correctly and personnel are trained to do 
so; 
(6) records are made (manually or by recording instruments or by both) 
during manufacture to show that all the steps required by the defined 
procedures and instructions have in fact been taken and that the 
quantity and quality of the product are as expected. Any significant 
deviations are fully recorded and investigated with the objective of 
determining the root cause and appropriate corrective and preventive 
action is implemented; 
(7) records covering manufacture and distribution, which enable the 
complete history of a batch to be traced, are retained in a 
comprehensible and accessible form; 
(8) the proper storage and distribution of the products which minimises 
any risk to their quality; 
(9) a system is available to recall any batch of product from sale or 
supply; and 
(10) complaints about marketed products are examined, the causes of 
quality defects investigated and appropria te measures are taken in 
respect of the defective products to prevent recurrence. 

4. Sanitation and hygiene: 
A high level of sanitation and hygiene shall be practiced in every aspect of 
the manufacture of drugs. The scope of sanitation and hygiene covers 
personnel, premises, equipment and apparatus, production materials and 
containers, products for cleaning and disinfection and anything that could 
become a source of contamination to the product. Potential sources of 
contamination shall be eliminated through an integrated comprehensive 
programme of sanitation and hygiene. 

5. Qualification and validation: 
5.1. In accordance with GMP, each pharmaceutical company shall identify 
what qualification and validation work is required to prove that the 
critical aspects of their particular operation is controlled. 
5.2. The key elements of a qualification and validation programme of a 
company shall be clearly defined and documented in a validation 
master plan. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
5.3. Qualification and validation shall establish and provide documentary 
evidence that— 
(a) the premises, supporting utilities, equipment and processes have 
been designed in accordance with the requirements for good 
manufacturing practices [design qualification (DQ)]; 
(b) the premises, supporting utilities and equipment have been built 
and i nstalled in compliance with their design specifications 
[installation qualification (IQ)]; 
(c) the premises, supporting utilities and equipment operate in 
accordance with their design specifications [operational 
qualification (OQ)]; 
(d) a specific process shall co nsistently produce a product meeting its 
predetermined specifications and quality attributes [process 
validation (PV), also called performance qualification (PQ)]. 
5.4. Any aspect of operation, including significant changes to the premises, 
facilities, equipment or processes, which may affect the quality of the 
product, directly or indirectly, shall be qualified and validated. 
5.5. Qualification and validation shall not be considered as one -off 
exercises. An on -going programme shall follow their first 
implementation and shall be based on a periodic review. 
5.6. The commitment to maintain continued validation status shall be stated 
in the relevant company documentation, such as the quality manual or 
validation master plan. 
5.7. The responsibility for performing validation shall be clearly defined. 
5.8. Validation studies are an essential part of good manufacturing practices 
and shall be conducted in accordance with predefined and approved 
protocols. 
5.9. A written report summarising the results recorded and the conclusions 
reached shall be prepared and stored. 
5.10. Processes and procedures shall be established on the basis of the 
results of the validation performed. 
5.11. Particular attention shall be paid to the validation of analytical test 
methods, automated systems and cleaning procedures. 
5.12. The pre mises, equipment or process system, facility qualification 
and validation shall be carried out. 

6. Complaints and adverse reaction: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6.1. All complaints and other information concerning potentially defective 
products shall be carefully reviewed according to the w ritten 
procedures and corrective action shall be taken. 
6.2. A person responsible for handling the complaints and deciding the 
measures to be taken shall be designated, together with sufficient 
supporting staff to assist him or her. If this person is different from the 
authorised person, the latter shall be made aware of any complaint, 
investigation or recall. 
6.3. There shall be written procedures describing the action to be taken, 
including the need to consider a recall, in the case of a complaint 
concerning a possible product defect. 
6.4. Special attention shall be given to establishing that the product that 
gave rise to a complaint was defective. 
6.5. Any complaint concerning a product defect shall be recorded with all 
the original details and thoroughly investigated. The person 
responsible for Quality Control (QC) shall normally be involved in the 
review of such investigations. 
6.6. If a product defect is identified or suspected in a batch, consideration 
shall be given as to whether other batches shall be checked in order to 
determine whether they are also affected. In particular, other batches 
that may contain reprocessed product from the defective batch shall be 
investigated. 
6.7. Where necessary, appropriate follow -up action, possibly including 
product recall, shall be taken after investigation and evaluation of the 
complaint. 
6.8. All decisions made and measures taken as a result of a complaint shall 
be recorded and referenced to the corresponding batch records. 
6.9. Complaint records shall be regularly reviewed for any indication of 
specific or recurring problems that require attention and might justify 
the recall of marketed products. 
6.10. The licensing authorities shall be informed if a manufacturer is 
considering action following the faulty manufacture, product 
deterioration, a suspect produc t or any other serious quality problems 
with a product. 
6.11. The licensee shall have a pharmacovigilance system in place for 
collecting, processing and forwarding the reports to the licensing 
authorities for information on the adverse drug reactions emerging 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
from the use of drugs manufactured or marketed by the licensee. 

7. Product recalls: 
7.1. There shall be a system to recall from the market, products known or 
suspected to be defective. 
7.2. The authorised person shall be responsible for the execution and 
coordination of recalls. He or she shall have sufficient staff to handle 
all aspects of the recalls with the appropriate degree of urgency. 
7.3. There shall be established written procedures, which are regularly 
reviewed and updated, for the organisation of any recall activi ty. 
Recall operations shall be capable of being initiated at the required 
level in the distribution chain. 
7.4. An instruction shall be included in the written procedures to store 
recalled products in a secure segregated area. 
7.5. The licensing authorities shall be informed of any intention to recall 
the product because it is, or is suspected of being, defective. 
7.6. The distribution records shall be readily available to the authorised 
person, and they shall contain sufficient information on wholesalers 
and directly supplied customers to permit an effective recall. 
7.7. The progress of the recall process shall be monitored and recorded. 
Records shall include the disposition of the product. A final report 
shall be issued, including reconciliation between the delivered and 
recovered quantities of the products. 
7.8. The effectiveness of the arrangements for recall shall be tested and 
evaluated from time to time. 
7.9. A prompt and effective product recall system of defective products 
shall be devised for timely information of all concerned stockists, 
wholesalers, suppliers, up to the retail level within the shortest period. 
The licensee may make use of both print and electronic media in this 
regard. 
7.10. There shall be an established written procedure in the form of Standard 
Operating Procedure for effective recall of products distributed by the 
licensee. Recall operations shall be capable of being initiated, so as to 
effectively reach at the level of each distribution channel. 
7.11. The distribution records shall be readily made available to the pers ons 
designated for recall. 
7.12. The designated person shall record a final report issued, including 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
reconciliation between the delivered and the recovered quantities of the 
products. 
7.13. The effectiveness of the arrangements for recall shall be evaluated 
from time to time. 
7.14. The recalled products shall be stored separately in a secured segregated 
area pending final decision on them. 

8. Change control: 
8.1. A formal change control system shall be established to evaluate all 
changes that may affect the production and control of the product. 
8.2. Written procedures shall cover the identiﬁcation, documentation, 
appropriate review, and approval of changes in raw materials, 
speciﬁcations, analytical methods, facilities, support systems, 
equipment (including computer hardware), process ing steps, labelling 
and packaging materials and computer software. 
8.3. Any proposals for relevant changes to GMP shall be drafted, reviewed 
and approved by the appropriate organisational units and reviewed and 
approved by the quality units. 
8.4. The potential impa ct of the proposed change on the quality of the 
intermediate or Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API) or finished 
product shall be evaluated. A classiﬁcation procedure may help in 
determining the level of testing, validation and documentation needed 
to ju stify changes to a validated process. Changes can be classiﬁed 
(e.g., as minor or major) depending on their nature and extent and the 
effect of these changes may have on the process. Scientiﬁc judgement 
shall be used to determine what additional testing and validation studies 
are appropriate to justify a change in a validated process. 
8.5. When implementing the approved changes, measures shall be taken to 
ensure that all the documents are affected by the changes as revised. 
8.6. After the change has been implemented there shall be an evaluation of 
the ﬁrst batch produced or tested under the change. 
8.7. The potential for critical changes to affect established retest or expiry 
dates shall be evaluated. If necessary, samples of the intermediate or 
API or finished product pro duced by the modiﬁed process can be 
placed on an accelerated stability programme or can be added to the 
stability monitoring programme or both. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
9. Production under loan licence or contract and contract analysis and 
other activities: 
9.1. Principle- Production und er loan licence or contract and contract 
analysis and any other activity covered by good manufacturing 
practices must be correctly defined, agreed and controlled in order to 
avoid misunderstandings that could result in a product, or work or 
analysis, of unsatisfactory quality. 
9.2. General- 
9.2.1. All arrangements for production under loan licence or contract 
and analysis, including technology transfer and any proposed 
changes in technical or other arrangements, shall be in 
accordance with the licence for the product concerned. 
9.2.2. The contract shall permit the loan licensee or contract giver to 
audit the facilities and activities of the manufacturing facility 
provider or contract acceptor or mutually agreed sub-contractors. 
9.2.3. In the case of contract analysis, the final appro val for release 
must be given by the authorised person in accordance with good 
manufacturing practices and the licence as specified in the 
contract. 
9.3. Loan licensee or contract giver- 
9.3.1. The product quality system of the loan licensee or contract giver 
shall include the control and review of any outsourced activities. 
The contract giver is responsible for assessing the legality, 
suitability and competence of the manufacturing facility provider 
or contract acceptor to successfully carry out the work or tests 
required, for approval for contract activities, and for ensuring by 
means of the contract that the principles of good manufacturing 
practices incorporating quality risk management principles are 
followed. 
9.3.2. The loan licensee or contract giver shall provide the 
manufacturing facility provider or contract acceptor with all the 
information necessary to carry out the contracted operations 
correctly in accordance with the licence and any other legal 
requirements. The loan licensee or contract giver shall ensure that 
the manufacturing facility provider or contract acceptor is fully 
aware of any hazards associated with the product, work or tests 
that might pose a risk to premises, equipment, personnel, other 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
materials or other products. 
9.3.3. The loan licensee or contract give r shall review and assess the 
records and results related to the outsourced activities. The 
contract giver shall ensure that all the products and materials 
delivered by the manufacturing facility provider or contract 
acceptor have been processed in accorda nce with good 
manufacturing practices and the licence; comply with their 
specifications and that the product has been released by the 
authorised person in accordance with good manufacturing 
practices and the licence. 
9.3.4. The loan licensee or contract giver sha ll monitor and review the 
performance of the manufacturing facility provider or contract 
acceptor including the implementation of any needed 
improvements and their effectiveness. 
9.3.5. The loan licensee or contract giver is responsible for ensuring 
that the manu facturing facility provider or contract acceptor 
understands that his or her activities may be subject to inspection 
by the competent authorities. 
9.4. Manufacturing facility provider or contract acceptor- 
9.4.1. The manufacturing facility provider or contract accepto r must 
have adequate premises, equipment, knowledge, experience and 
competent personnel to satisfactorily carry out the work ordered 
by the loan licensee or contract giver. Contract manufacture shall 
be undertaken only by a manufacturer who holds a valid 
manufacturing licence. 
9.4.2. The manufacturing facility provider or contract acceptor shall 
not pass to a third party any of the work entrusted to him or her 
under the contract without the loan licensee or contract giver’s 
prior evaluation and approval of the arrangements. Arrangements 
made between the manufacturing facility provider or contract 
acceptor and any third party shall ensure that information and 
knowledge, including that from assessments of the suitability of 
the third party, are made available in the same way as between 
the original loan licensee or contract giver and contract acceptor. 
9.4.3. The manufacturing facility provider or contract acceptor shall 
refrain from any activity (including unauthorised changes outside 
the terms of the contract) that may adversely affect the quality of 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
the product manufactured oranalysed or both for the loan 
licensee or contract giver. 
9.5. Contract- 
9.5.1. There must be a written contract between the loan licensee or 
contract giver and the manufacturing facility provider or contract 
acceptor which clearly establishes the responsibilities of each 
party, covering the outsourced activities, the products or 
operations to which they are related, communication processes 
relating to the outsourced activities and any technical 
arrangements made in connection with it. 
9.5.2. The contract must clearly state the way in which the authorised 
person, in releasing each batch of product for sale or issuing the 
certificate of analysis, exercises his or her full responsibility and 
ensures that each batch has been manufactured in, and checked 
for, compliance with the requirements of the licence. 
9.5.3. Technical aspects of the contract shall be drawn up by 
competent persons with suitable knowledge of pharmaceutical 
technology, analysis and good manufacturing practices. 
9.5.4. All arrangements for production and analysis must be in 
accordance with the licence and agreed by both parties. 
9.5.5. The contract shall clearly describe who is responsible for 
contracted activities e.g., knowledge management, technology 
transfer, supply chain, su b-contracting, testing and releasing 
materials and undertaking production and quality control, 
including in -process controls, and who has responsibility for 
sampling and analysis. In the case of contract analysis, the 
contract shall state whether or not th e manufacturing facility 
provider or contract acceptor shall take samples at the premises 
of the manufacturer. 
9.5.6. Manufacturing, analytical and distribution records, and reference 
samples, shall be kept by, or be available to, the loan licensee or 
contract giver. Any records relevant to assessing the quality of a 
product in the event of complaints or a suspected defect, or to 
investigating a suspected product or laboratory fraud, must be 
accessible and specified in the procedures of the loan licensee or 
contract giver. 
9.5.7. The contract shall describe the handling of starting materials, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
intermediate, bulk and finished products, if they are rejected. It 
shall also describe the procedure to be followed if the contract 
analysis shows that the tested product must be rejected. 

10. Self-inspection, quality audits and suppliers’ audits and approval: 
10.1. The purpose of self -inspection is to evaluate the manufacturer’s 
compliance with good manufacturing practices in all aspects of 
production and QC. The self -inspection programme shall be designed 
to detect any shortcomings in the implementation of good 
manufacturing practices and to recommend the necessary corrective 
actions. Self-inspections shall be performed routinely, and may be, in 
addition, performed on special occasions e.g., in the case of product 
recall or repeated rejections, or when an inspection by the regulatory 
authorities is announced. The team responsible for self -inspection 
shall consist of personnel who can evaluate the implementation of 
good manufacturing practices objectively. All recommendations for 
corrective action shall be implemented. The procedure for self -
inspection shall be documented and there shall be an effective follow -
up programme. 
10.2. Items for self-inspection-Written instructions for self-inspection shall 
be established to provide a minimum and uniform standard of 
requirements. These may include questionnaires on good 
manufacturing practices requirements covering at least the following 
items, namely:- 
(a) personnel; 
(b) premises including personnel facilities; 
(c) maintenance of buildings and equipment; 
(d) storage of starting materials and finished products; 
(e) equipment; 
(f) production and in-process controls; 
(g) quality control (QC); 
(h) documentation; 
(i) sanitation and hygiene; 
(j) validation and revalidation programmes; 
(k) calibration of instruments or measurement systems; 
(l) recall procedures; 
(m) complaints management; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(n) labels control; and 
(o) results of previous self-inspections and any corrective steps taken. 
10.3. Self-inspection team - Management shall appoint a self -inspection 
team consisting of experts in their respective fields who are familiar 
with GMP. The members of the team may be appointed from inside or 
outside the company. 
10.4. Frequency of self -inspection- The frequency with which self -
inspections are conducted may depend on company requirements but 
shall be at least once in a year. The frequency shall be stated in the 
procedure. 
10.5. Self-inspection report- A report shall be made at the completion of a 
self-inspection. The report shall include the following, namely:- 
(a) self-inspection results; 
(b) evaluation and conclusions; and 
(c) recommended corrective actions. 
10.6. Follow-up action- There shall be an effective follow -up programme. 
The company management shall evaluate both the self -inspection 
report and the corrective actions as necessary. 
10.7. Quality audit- It may be u seful to supplement self -inspections with a 
quality audit. A quality audit consists of an examination and 
assessment of all or part of a quality system with the specific purpose 
of improving it. A quality audit is usually conducted by outside or 
independent specialists or a team designated by the management for 
this purpose. Such audits may also be extended to suppliers and 
contractors. 
10.8. Suppliers’ audits and approval- 
10.8.1. The person responsible for quality control shall have 
responsibility, together with othe r relevant departments, for 
approving suppliers who can reliably supply starting and 
packaging materials that meet established specifications. 
10.8.2. Before suppliers are approved and included in the approved 
suppliers’ list or specifications, they shall be evalu ated. The 
evaluation shall take into account a supplier’s history and the 
nature of the materials to be supplied. If an audit is required, it 
shall determine the supplier’s ability to conform with good 
manufacturing practices standards. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
11. Personnel: 
11.1. Principle-The establishment and maintenance of a satisfactory system 
of Quality Assurance (QA) and the correct manufacture and control of 
pharmaceutical products and active ingredients rely upon people. For 
this reason there must be sufficient qualified personnel to carry out all 
the tasks for which the manufacturer is responsible. Individual 
responsibilities shall be clearly defined and understood by the persons 
concerned and recorded as written descriptions. 
11.2. General- 
11.2.1. The manufacturer shall have an adequate numbe r of 
personnel with the necessary qualifications and practical 
experience. The responsibilities placed on any one individual 
shall not be so extensive as to present any risk to quality. 
11.2.2. Responsible staff shall have its specific duties recorded in 
written d escriptions and adequate authority to carry out its 
responsibilities. Its duties may be delegated to designated 
deputies with a satisfactory level of qualifications. There shall 
be no gaps or unexplained overlaps in the responsibilities of 
personnel concer ned with the application of good 
manufacturing practices. The manufacturer shall have an 
organisation chart. 
11.2.3. All personnel shall be aware of the principles of good 
manufacturing practices that affect them and receive initial and 
continuing training, includ ing hygiene instruction, relevant to 
their needs. All personnel shall be motivated to support the 
establishment and maintenance of high quality standards. 
11.2.4. Steps shall be taken to prevent unauthorised people from 
entering production, storage and QC areas. Personnel who do 
not work in these areas shall not use them as a passageway. 
11.3. Key personnel- 
11.3.1. Key personnel include the heads of production, the heads of 
quality units and the authorised person. The quality units 
typically comprise the QA and QC functions. I n some cases, 
these could be combined in one department. The authorised 
person may also be responsible for one or more of these quality 
units. Normally, key posts shall be occupied by full -time 
personnel. The heads of production and quality units shall be 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
independent of each other. In large organisations, it may be 
necessary to delegate some of the functions; however, the 
responsibility cannot be delegated. 
11.3.2. Key personnel responsible for supervising the production and 
quality units for pharmaceutical produc ts shall possess the 
qualifications and experience as specified under the rules. Their 
education shall include the study of an appropriate combination 
of the following, namely:- 
(a) chemistry (analytical or organic) or biochemistry; 
(b) chemical engineering; 
(c) microbiology; 
(d) pharmaceutical sciences and technology; 
(e) pharmacology and toxicology; 
(f) physiology; or 
(g) other related sciences. 

 They shall also have adequate practical experience in the 
manufacture and QA of pharmaceutical products. In order to 
gain such experienc e, a preparatory period may be required, 
during which they shall perform their duties under professional 
guidance. The scientific education and practical experience of 
experts shall be such, so as to enable them to exercise 
independent professional judgeme nt, based on the application 
of scientific principles and understanding to the practical 
problems encountered in the manufacture and QC of 
pharmaceutical products. 
11.3.3. The heads of the production and the quality units shall have 
shared, or jointly exercised, r esponsibilities relating to quality. 
They may include the following, namely:- 
(a) authorisation of written procedures and other documents, 
including amendments; 
(b) monitoring and control of the manufacturing environment; 
(c) plant hygiene; 
(d) process validation and calibration of analytical apparatus; 
(e) training, including the application and principles of QA; 
(f) approval and monitoring of suppliers of materials; 
(g) approval and monitoring of contract manufacturers; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(h) designation and monitoring of storage conditions for 
materials and products; 
(i) performance and evaluation of in-process controls; 
(j) retention of records; 
(k) monitoring of compliance with good manufacturing 
practices requirements; and 
(l) inspection, investigation and taking of samples in order to 
monitor factors that may affect product quality. 
11.3.4. The head of production has the following responsibilities, 
namely:- 
(a) to ensure that products are produced and stored in 
accordance with the appropriate documentation in order to 
obtain the required quality; 
(b) to approve the instructions relating to production operations, 
including the in -process controls and to ensure their strict 
implementation; 
(c) to ensure that the production records are evaluated and 
signed by a designated person; 
(d) to check the maintenance of the department, premises and 
equipment; 
(e) to ensure that the appropriate process validations and 
calibrations of control equipment are performed and 
recorded and the reports are made available; and 
(f) to ensure that the required initial and continuing training of 
production personnel is carried out and adapted according to 
need. 
11.3.5. The heads of the quality units generally have the following 
responsibilities, namely:- 
(a) to approve or reject starting materials, packaging materials 
and intermediate, bulk and finished products in relation to 
their specifications; 
(b) to evaluate batch records; 
(c) to ensure that all necessary testing is carried out; 
(d) to approve sampling instructions, specifications, test 
methods and other QC procedures; 
(e) to approve and monitor analysis carried out under contract; 
(f) to check the mai ntenance of the department, premises and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
equipment; 
(g) to ensure that the appropriate validations, including those 
of analytical procedures and calibrations of control 
equipment are carried out; 
(h) to ensure that the required initial and continuing training of 
quality unit personnel is carried out and adapted according 
to need; 
(i) establishment, implementation and maintenance of the 
quality system; 
(j) supervision of the regular internal audits or self-inspections; 
(k) participation in external audit (vendor audit); and 
(l) participation in validation programmes. 
11.3.6. The authorised person is responsible for compliance with 
technical or regulatory requirements related to the quality of 
finished products and the approval for the release of finished 
product for sale or supply. 
11.3.7. Assessment of finished products shall embrace all relevant 
factors, including the production conditions, the results of in -
process testing, the manufacturing (including packaging) 
documentation, compliance with the specification for the 
finished product and an examination of the finished pack. 
11.3.8. No batch of product is to be released for sale or supply prior to 
certification by the authorised persons. 
11.3.9. The authorised person responsible for approving a batch for 
release shall always ensure that the following requireme nts 
have been met:- 
(a) the licence and the approval requirements for the product 
have been met for the batch concerned; 
(b) the principles and guidelines of GMP, as laid down in this 
Part, have been followed; 
(c) the principal manufacturing and testing processes have been 
validated; 
(d) all the necessary checks and tests have been performed and 
account taken of the production conditions and 
manufacturing records; 
(e) any planned changes or deviations in manufacturing or QC 
have been notified in accordance with a well -defined 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
reporting system before any product is released. Such 
changes may need notification and approval by the licensing 
authority; 
(f) any additional sampling, inspection, tests and checks have 
been carried out or initiated, as appropriate, to cover 
planned changes and deviations; 
(g) all necessary production and QC documentation has been 
completed and endorsed by supervisors trained in 
appropriate disciplines; 
(h) appropriate audits, self -inspections and spot -checks are 
carried out by experienced and trained staff; 
(i) approval has been given by the head of quality control; and 
(j) all relevant factors have been considered, including the 
factor associated with the output batch directly under review 
(e.g., sub-division of output batches from a common input, 
factors associated with continuous production runs). 
11.3.10. The function of the approval of the release of a finished batch 
or a product can be delegated to a designated person with 
appropriate qualifications and experience who will release the 
product in accordance with an approved pro cedure. This is 
normally done by quality assurance by means of batch review. 

11.4. Training- 
11.4.1. The manufacturer shall provide training in accordance with a 
written programme for all personnel whose duties take them 
into manufacturing areas or into the control lab oratories 
(including the technical, maintenance and cleaning personnel) 
and for other personnel as required. 
11.4.2. Besides basic training on the theory and practice of good 
manufacturing practices, newly recruited personnel shall 
receive training appropriate to the duties assigned to them. 
Continuous training shall also be given, and its practical 
effectiveness be assessed periodically. Approved training 
programmes shall be available. Training records shall be kept. 
11.4.3. Personnel working in areas where contamination is a hazard 
e.g., clean areas or areas where highly active, toxic, infectious 
or sensitising materials are handled, shall be given specific 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
training. 
11.4.4. The concept of quality assurance and all the measures which 
aid its understanding and implementation shall be fully 
discussed during the training sessions. 
11.4.5. Visitors or untrained personnel shall preferably not be taken 
into the production and quality control areas. If this is 
unavoidable, they shall be given relevant information in 
advance (particularly about p ersonal hygiene) and the 
prescribed protective clothing. They shall be closely 
supervised. 
11.4.6. Consultant and contract staff shall be qualified for the services 
they provide. Evidence of this shall be included in the training 
records. 

11.5. Personal hygiene- 
11.5.1. All personnel, prior to and during employment, as appropriate, 
shall undergo health checkups. Personnel conducting visual 
inspections shall also undergo periodic eye checkups. 
11.5.2. All personnel shall be trained in the practices of personal 
hygiene. A high level of personal hygiene shall be observed by 
all those concerned with manufacturing processes. In 
particular, personnel shall be instructed to wash and sanitise 
their hands before entering production areas. Signs to this 
effect shall be posted and instructions are complied with. 
11.5.3. Any person shown at any time to have an apparent illness or 
open lesions that may adversely affect the quality of products 
shall not be allowed to handle starting materials, packaging 
materials, in-process materials or drugs until his or he r health 
condition is no longer judged to be a risk. 
11.5.4. All employees shall be instructed and encouraged to report to 
their immediate supervisor any conditions (relating to plant, 
equipment or personnel) that they consider may adversely 
affect the products. 
11.5.5. Direct contact shall be avoided between the operator’s hands 
and starting materials, primary packaging materials and 
intermediate or bulk products. 
11.5.6. To ensure protection of the product from contamination, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
personnel shall wear clean body coverings appropriate to the 
duties they perform, including appropriate hair covering. Used 
clothes, if reusable, shall be stored in a separate closed 
containers until properly laundered and, if necessary, 
disinfected or sterilised. 
11.5.7. Smoking, eating, drinking, chewing, and keep ing plants, food, 
drink, smoking material and personal medicines shall not be 
permitted in production, laboratory and storage areas, or in any 
other areas where they might adversely influence product 
quality. 
11.5.8. Personal hygiene procedures, including the wea ring of 
protective clothing, shall apply to all persons entering 
production areas, whether they are temporary or full -time 
employees or non -employees, e.g., contractors’ employees, 
visitors, senior managers and inspectors. 

12. Premises: 
12.1. Principle- Premises mu st be located, designed, constructed, adapted 
and maintained to suit the operations to be carried out. They shall 
conform to the conditions as laid down in the Factories Act, 1948 (63 
of 1948). 

12.2. General- 
12.2.1. The layout and design of premises must aim to minimi se the 
risk of errors and permit effective cleaning and maintenance in 
order to avoid cross contamination, build-up of dust or dirt, and 
in general, any adverse effect on the quality of products. 
12.2.2. Where dust is generated (e.g., during sampling, weighing, 
mixing and processing operations or packaging of powder), 
measures shall be taken to avoid cross -contamination and 
facilitate cleaning. 
12.2.3. Premises shall be situated in an environment that, when 
considered together with measures to protect the manufacturing 
process, presents minimum risk of causing any contamination 
of materials or products. 
12.2.4. Premises used for the manufacture of finished products shall be 
suitably designed and constructed to facilitate good sanitation. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
12.2.5. Premises shall be carefully maintained, and it shall be ensured 
that repair and maintenance operations do not present any 
hazard to the quality of products. 
12.2.6. Premises shall be cleaned and, where applicable, disinfected 
according to detailed written procedures and records shall be 
maintained. 
12.2.7. Electrical supply, lighting, temperature, humidity and 
ventilation shall be appropriate and they do not adversely 
affect, directly or indirectly, either the pharmaceutical products 
during their manufacture and storage or the accurate 
functioning of equipment. 
12.2.8. The design, installation, qualification and maintenance of the 
Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning (HVAC) systems of the 
manufacturing plant shall be carried out. 
12.2.9. Premises shall be designed and equipped so as to afford 
maximum protection against the entry of insects, birds or other 
animals. There shall be a procedure for rodent and pest control. 
12.2.10. Premises shall be designed to ensure the logical flow of 
materials and personnel. 

12.3. Ancillary areas- 
12.3.1. Rest and refreshment rooms shall be separate from 
manufacturing and control areas. 
12.3.2. Facilities for changing and storing clothes and for washing and 
toilet purposes shall be easily accessible and appropriate for the 
number of users. Toilets shall not communicate directly with 
production or storage areas. 
12.3.3. Maintenance work shops shall, if possible be separated from 
production areas. Whenever parts and tools are stored in the 
production area, they shall be kept in rooms or lockers reserved 
for that use. 
12.3.4. Animal houses shall be well isolated from other areas, with 
separate entrance (animal access) and air-handling facilities. 

12.4. Storage areas- 
12.4.1. Storage areas shall be of sufficient capacity to allow orderly 
storage of the various categories of materials and products with 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
proper separation and segregation; starting and packaging 
materials, intermediates, bulk and finished products, products 
in quarantine and released, rejected, returned or recalled 
products. 
12.4.2. Storage areas shall be designed or adapted to ensure good 
storage conditions. In particular, they shall be clean, dry, 
sufficiently lit and maintained within acceptable temperature 
limits. Where special storage conditions are required (e.g., 
temperature, humidity) they shall be provided, controlled, 
monitored and recorded, where appropriate. 
12.4.3. Receiving and dispatch bays shall be se parated and shall 
protect the materials and products from the weather. Receiving 
areas shall be designed and equipped to allow containers of 
incoming materials to be cleaned, if necessary, before storage. 
12.4.4. Where quarantine status is ensured by storage in separate areas, 
these areas must be clearly marked and their access restricted 
to authorised personnel. Any system replacing the physical 
quarantine shall give equivalent security. 
12.4.5. Segregation shall be provided for the storage of rejected, 
recalled or returned materials or products. 
12.4.6. Highly active and radioactive materials, narcotics, other 
dangerous drugs, and substances presenting special risks of 
abuse, fire or explosion shall be stored in safe and secure areas. 
12.4.7. Printed packaging materials are considered c ritical to the 
conformity of the pharmaceutical product to its labelling and 
special attention shall be paid to sampling and the safe and 
secure storage of these materials. 
12.4.8. There shall normally be a separate sampling area for starting 
materials. If sampling is performed in the storage area, it shall 
be conducted in such a way so as to prevent contamination or 
cross-contamination. 

12.5. Weighing areas-The weighing of starting materials and the estimation 
of yield by weighing shall be carried out in separate weigh ing areas 
designed for that use, for example, with provisions for dust control. 
Such areas may be part of either storage or production areas. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
12.6. Production areas- 
12.6.1. In order to minimise the risk of a serious medical hazard due to 
cross-contamination, dedicated and self -contained facilities 
must be available for the production of particular 
pharmaceutical products, such as highly sensitising materials 
(e.g., penicillins) or biological preparations (e.g., live 
microorganisms). The production of certain other high ly active 
products, such as some antibiotics, hormones, cytotoxic 
substances and non -pharmaceutical products, shall not be 
conducted in the same facilities. In exceptional cases, the 
principle of campaign working in the same facilities can be 
accepted prov ided that specific precautions are taken and the 
necessary validations (including cleaning validation) are made. 
The manufacture of technical poisons, such as pesticides and 
herbicides, shall not be allowed in premises used for the 
manufacture of pharmaceutical products. 
12.6.2. Premises shall preferably be laid out in such a way so as to 
allow the production to take place in areas connected in a 
logical order corresponding to the sequence of the operations 
and to the requisite cleanliness levels. 
12.6.3. The adequacy of t he working and in -process storage space 
shall permit the orderly and logical positioning of equipment 
and materials so as to minimise the risk of confusion between 
different pharmaceutical products or their components, to avoid 
cross-contamination and to m inimise the risk of omission or 
wrong application of any of the manufacturing or control steps. 
12.6.4. Where starting and primary packaging materials and 
intermediate or bulk products are exposed to the environment, 
interior surfaces (walls, floors and ceilings) shall be smooth 
and free from cracks and open joints, shall not shed particulate 
matter and shall permit easy and effective cleaning and, if 
necessary, disinfection. 
12.6.5. Pipework, light fittings, ventilation points and other services 
shall be designed and sit ed to avoid the creation of recesses 
that are difficult to clean. As far as possible, for maintenance 
purposes, they shall be accessible from outside the 
manufacturing areas. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
12.6.6. Drains shall be of adequate size and designed and equipped to 
prevent back -flow. Open channels shall be avoided where 
possible, but if they are necessary they shall be shallow to 
facilitate cleaning and disinfection. 
12.6.7. Production areas shall be effectively ventilated, with air-control 
facilities (including filtration of air to a sufficie nt level to 
prevent contamination and cross -contamination, as well as 
control of temperature and, where necessary, humidity) 
appropriate to the products handled, to the operations 
undertaken and to the external environment. These areas shall 
be regularly m onitored during both production and non -
production periods so as to ensure compliance with their design 
specifications. 
12.6.8. Premises for the packaging of pharmaceutical products shall be 
specifically designed and laid out so as to avoid mix ups, 
contamination or cross-contamination. 
12.6.9. Production areas shall be well lit, particularly where visual 
online controls are carried out. 

12.7. Quality Control (QC) areas- 
12.7.1. QC laboratories shall be separated from production areas. 
Areas where biological, microbiological or radioi sotope test 
methods are employed shall be separated from each other. 
12.7.2. QC laboratories shall be designed to suit the operations to be 
carried out in them. Sufficient space shall be given to avoid 
mix ups and cross -contamination. There shall be adequate 
suitable storage space for samples, reference standards (if 
necessary, with cooling), solvents, reagents and records. 
12.7.3. The design of the laboratories shall take into account the 
suitability of construction materials, prevention of fumes, and 
ventilation. There s hall be separate air supply to laboratories 
and production areas. Separate air -handling units and other 
provisions are needed for biological, microbiological and 
radioisotope laboratories. 
12.7.4. A separate room may be needed for instruments to protect 
them again st electrical interference, vibration, contact with 
excessive moisture and other external factors or where it is 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
necessary to isolate the instruments. 

13. Equipment: 
13.1. Equipment must be located, designed, constructed, adapted and 
maintained to suit the operat ions to be carried out. The layout and 
design of equipment must aim to minimise the risk of errors and 
permit effective cleaning and maintenance in order to avoid cross -
contamination, build-up of dust or dirt, and, in general, any adverse 
effect on the quality of products. 
13.2. Equipment shall be installed in such a way so as to minimise any risk 
of error or of contamination. 
13.3. Fixed pipework shall be clearly labelled to indicate the contents and, 
where applicable, the direction of flow. 
13.4. All service pipework and devices shall be adequately marked and 
special attention paid to the provision of non -interchangeable 
connections or adaptors for dangerous gases and liquids. 
13.5. Balances and other measuring equipment of an appropriate range and 
precision shall be available for production and control operations and 
shall be calibrated according to a fixed schedule. 
13.6. Production equipment shall be thoroughly cleaned according to a 
fixed schedule. 
13.7. Laboratory equipment and instruments shall be suited to the testing 
procedures undertaken. 
13.8. Washing, cleaning and drying equipment shall be chosen and used so 
as not to be a source of contamination. 
13.9. Production equipment shall not present any hazard to the products. 
The parts of the production equipment that come into contact with the 
product must not be reactive, additive or absorptive to an extent that 
would affect the quality of the product. 
13.10. Defective equipment shall be removed from production and QC 
areas. If this is not possible, it shall be clearly labelled as defective to 
prevent use. 
13.11. Closed equipment shall be used whenever appropriate. Where open 
equipment is used or equipment is opened, precautions shall be taken 
to minimize the contamination. 
13.12. Non-dedicated equipment shall be cleaned according to validated 
cleaning procedures betwee n being used for production of different 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
pharmaceutical products to prevent cross-contamination. 
13.13. Current drawings of critical equipment and support systems shall be 
maintained. 

14. Materials: 
14.1. The main objective of a pharmaceutical plant is to produce finished 
products for patients’ use from a combination of materials (starting 
and packaging). 
14.2. Materials include starting materials, packaging materials, gases, 
solvents, process aids, reagents and labelling materials. 
14.3. No materials used for operations such as clea ning, lubrication of 
equipment and pest control shall come into direct contact with the 
product. Where possible, such materials shall be of a suitable grade 
(e.g., food grade) to minimise health risks. 
14.4. All incoming materials and finished products shall be quarantined 
immediately after receipt or processing, until they are released for use 
or distribution. 
14.5. All materials and products shall be stored under the appropriate 
conditions established by the manufacturer, and in an orderly fashion, 
to permit batch se gregation and stock rotation by a first -expire, first-
out rule. 
14.6. Water used in the manufacture of pharmaceutical products shall be 
suitable for its intended use. There shall be validated system for 
treatment of water drawn from own or any other source to re nder it 
potable in accordance with the standards specified by the Bureau of 
Indian Standards or Local Municipality, as the case may be, so as to 
produce purified water conforming to Pharmacopoeial specification. 
Purified Water so produced shall only be use d for all the operations 
except washing and cleaning operations where potable water may be 
used. Water shall be stored in tanks, which do not adversely affect 
quality of water and ensure freedom from microbiological growth. 
The tank shall be cleaned period ically and records maintained by the 
licensee in this behalf. Good manufacturing practices regarding the 
design, i nstallation and operation of pharmaceutical w ater sy stems 
including guidance about which quality of w ater to use for specific 
applications, such as the manufacture of a ctive pharmaceutical 
ingredients and dosage forms, shall be ensured. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 

14.7. The purchase of starting materials is an important operation that shall 
involve staff who has a particular and thorough knowledge of the 
products and suppliers. 
14.8. Starting materials shall be purchased only from the approved 
suppliers and, where possible, directly from the producer. It is also 
recommended that the specifications established by the manufacturer 
for the starting materials be discussed with the suppli ers. It is 
beneficial for all critical aspects of the production and control of the 
starting material in question, including handling, labelling and 
packaging requirements as well as complaints and rejection 
procedures, to be contractually agreed between t he manufacturer and 
the supplier. 
14.9. For each consignment, at a minimum, the containers shall be checked 
at least for integrity of package and seal and for correspondence 
between the order, the delivery note, and the supplier’s labels. 
14.10. All incoming materials shall be checked to ensure that the 
consignment corresponds to the order. Containers shall be cleaned 
where necessary and labelled, if required, with the prescribed 
information. Where additional labels are attached to containers, the 
original information shall not be lost. 
14.11. Damage to containers and any other problem that might adversely 
affect the quality of a material shall be recorded and reported to the 
QC Department and investigated. 
14.12. If one delivery of material is made up of different batches, each batch 
must be considered as separate for sampling, testing and release. 
14.13. Starting materials in the storage area shall be appropriately labelled. 
Labels shall bear at least the following information, namely:— 
(a) the designated name of the product and the internal c ode reference 
where applicable; 
(b) the batch number given by the supplier and, on receipt, the control 
or batch number given by the manufacturer, if any, documented so 
as to ensure traceability; 
(c) the status of the contents (e.g., in quarantine, on test, releas ed, 
rejected, returned or recalled); and 
(d) where appropriate, an expiry date or a date beyond which retesting 
is necessary. When fully validated computerised storage systems 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
are used, not all of the above information need be in a legible form 
on the label. 
14.14. Only raw materials which have been released by the QC Department 
and which are within their shelf-life shall be used. 
14.15. The raw materials other than APIs, if released by QC Department 
without specific batch testing, for use in manufacturing, it shall be 
based on vendor approval and statistical data analysis of earlier test 
results of such material for release. 
14.16. There shall be appropriate procedures or measures to ensure the 
identity of the contents of each container of starting material. Bulk 
containers from which samples have been drawn shall be identified. 
14.17. Only starting materials released by the QC Department and within 
their shelf-life shall be used. 
14.18. Starting materials shall be dispensed only by designated persons, 
following a written procedure, to ensure th at the correct materials are 
accurately weighed or measured into clean and properly labelled 
containers. 
14.19. Each dispensed material and its weight or volume shall be 
independently checked and recorded. 
14.20. Materials dispensed for each batch of the final product s hall be kept 
together and conspicuously labelled as such. 
14.21. The purchase, handling and control of primary and printed packaging 
materials shall as for starting materials. 
14.22. Particular attention shall be paid to printed packaging materials. They 
shall be stored in secure conditions so as to exclude the possibility of 
unauthorised access. Roll feed labels shall be used wherever possible. 
Cut labels and other loose printed materials shall be stored and 
transported in separate closed containers so as to avoid mix u ps. 
Packaging materials shall be issued for use only by designated 
personnel following an approved and documented procedure. 
14.23. Each delivery or batch of printed or primary packaging material shall 
be given a specific reference number or identification mark. 
14.24. Out-dated or obsolete primary packaging material or printed 
packaging material shall be destroyed and its disposal shall be 
recorded. 
14.25. All products and packaging materials to be used shall be checked on 
delivery to the packaging department for quantity, ide ntity and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
conformity with the packaging instructions. 
14.26. All containers and closures intended for use shall comply with the 
pharmacopoeial requirements. Suitable validated test methods, 
sample sizes, specifications, cleaning procedure and sterilisation 
procedure, wherever indicated, shall be strictly followed to ensure 
that these are not reactive, additive, absorptive, or leach to an extent 
that significantly affects the quality or purity of the drug. No second 
hand or used containers and closures shall be used. 
14.26.1. Whenever bottles are being used, the written schedule of 
cleaning shall be laid down and followed. Where bottles are 
not dried after washing, they shall be rinsed with purified 
water or water for injection, as the case may be. 
14.26.2. The requirements mention ed in this Part do not include 
requirements of machinery, equipment and premises required 
for preparation of containers and closures for different dosage 
forms and categories of drugs. The suitability and adequacy of 
the machinery, equipment and premises s hall be examined 
taking into consideration the requirements of each licensee in 
this respect. 
14.26.3. Packaging material to be used for pharmaceutical products 
shall be in accordance with the requirements prescribed in 
Indian Pharmacopoeia (IP). 
14.27. Intermediate and b ulk products shall be kept under appropriate 
conditions. 
14.28. Intermediate and bulk products purchased shall be handled on receipt 
as they were starting materials. 
14.29. Finished products shall be held in quarantine until their final release, 
after which they shall b e stored as usable stock under conditions 
established by the manufacturer. 
14.30. The evaluation of finished products and the documentation necessary 
for release of a product for sale are described in paragraph 19. 
14.31. Rejected materials and products shall be clearly marked and stored 
separately in restricted areas. They shall either be returned to the 
suppliers or, where appropriate, reprocessed or destroyed in a timely 
manner. Whatever action is taken shall be approved by the authorised 
personnel and recorded. 
14.32. The reworking or recovery of rejected products shall be exceptional. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
It is permitted only if the quality of the final product is not affected, if 
the specifications are met, and if it is done in accordance with a 
defined and authorised procedure after evaluatio n of the risks 
involved. A record shall be kept of the reworking or recovery. A 
reworked batch shall be given a new batch number. 
14.33. The introduction of all or part of earlier batches, conforming to the 
required quality standards, into a batch of the same pro duct at a 
defined stage of manufacture shall be authorised beforehand. This 
recovery shall be carried out in accordance with a defined procedure 
after evaluation of the risks involved, including any possible effect on 
shelf-life. The recovery shall be recorded. 
14.34. The need for additional testing of any finished product that has been 
reprocessed, reworked or into which a recovered product has been 
incorporated, shall be considered by the QC Department. 
14.35. Recalled products shall be identified and stored separately in a secure 
area until a decision is taken and the decision shall be made as soon 
as possible. 
14.36. Products returned from the market shall be destroyed unless it is 
certain that their quality is satisfactory; in such cases they may be 
considered for resale or relabelling, or alternative action taken only 
after they have been critically assessed by the QC function in 
accordance with a written procedure. The nature of the product, any 
special storage conditions it requires, its condition and history, and 
the time elapsed since it was issued shall be taken into account in the 
assessment. Where any doubt arises over the quality of the product, it 
shall not be considered suitable for reissue or reuse. Any action taken 
shall be appropriately recorded. 
14.37. There shall be records for the receipt and preparation of reagents and 
culture media. 
14.38. Reagents made up in the laboratory shall be prepared according to the 
written procedures and appropriately labelled. The label shall indicate 
the concentration, standardisation factor, shelf-life, the date when re -
standardisation is due and the storage conditions. The label shall be 
signed and dated by the person preparing the reagent. 
14.39. Both positive and negative controls shall be applied to verify the 
suitability of culture media each time they are prepared and used. The 
size of the inoculum used in positive controls shall be appropriate to 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
the sensitivity required. 

15. Reference Standards: 
15.1. Whenever official reference standards exist, they shall be used. 
15.2. Indian Pharmacopoeia reference standa rds shall be procured from 
Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission. 
15.3. Official reference standards shall only be used for the purpose 
described in the appropriate monograph. 
15.4. Reference standards prepared by the manufacturer shall be tested, 
released and stored in the same way as official standards. They shall be 
kept under the responsibility of a designated person in a secure area. 
15.5. Secondary or working standards may be established by the application 
of appropriate tests and checks at regular intervals to ensure 
standardisation. 
15.6. Reference standards shall be properly labelled with at least the 
following information, namely- 
(a) name of the material; 
(b) batch or lot number and control number; 
(c) date of preparation; 
(d) shelf-life; 
(e) potency; and 
(f) storage conditions. 
15.7. All in -house working standards or secondary standards shall be 
standardised against an official reference standard, when available, 
initially and at regular intervals thereafter. 
15.8. All reference standards shall be stored and used in a manner that will 
not adversely affect their quality. 

16. Waste materials: 
16.1. Provision shall be made for the proper and safe storage of waste 
materials waiting disposal. Toxic substances and flammable materials 
shall be stored in suitably designed, separate, enclosed cupboards. 
16.2. Waste material shall not be allowed to accumulate. It shall be collected 
in suitable receptacles for removal to collection points outside the 
buildings and disposed of safely and in a sanitary manner at regular 
and frequent intervals. 
16.3. The disposal of sewage and effluents (solid, liq uid and gas) from the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
manufacturing area shall be in conformity with the requirements of the 
guidelines issued by the Environmental Pollution Control Board. 
16.4. All bio-medical waste shall be destroyed as per the provisions of the 
Bio-Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2016. 
16.5. Rodenticides, insecticides, fumigating agents and sanitising materials 
shall not be permitted to contaminate equipment, starting materials, 
packaging materials, in-process materials or finished products. 

17. Documentation: 
17.1. Principle-Good documentation is an essential part of the quality 
assurance system and, as such, shall exist for all aspects of good 
manufacturing practices. Its aims are to define the specifications and 
procedures for all materials and methods of manufacture and control; 
to ensure that all personnel concerned with manufacture know what to 
do and when to do it; to ensure that authorised persons have all the 
information necessary to decide whether or not to release a batch of a 
drug for sale; to ensure the existence of documented evidence, 
traceability and to provide records and an audit trial that will permit 
investigation. It ensures the availability of the data needed for 
validation, review and statistical analysis. The design and use of 
documents depend upon the manufacturer. In some cases, some or all 
of the documents described in this paragraph may be brought 
together, but they will usually be separate. 

17.2. General- 
17.2.1. Documents shall be designed, prepared, reviewed and 
distributed with care. They shall comply with th e relevant 
Parts of the manufacturing and licences. 
17.2.2. Documents shall be approved, signed and dated by the 
responsible persons. No document shall be changed without 
authorisation and approval. 
17.2.3. Documents shall have unambiguous contents; the title, nature 
and purpose shall be clearly stated. They shall be laid out in 
an orderly manner and be easy to check. Reproduced 
documents shall be clear and legible. The reproduction of 
working documents from master documents must not allow 
any error to be introduced through the reproduction process. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
17.2.4. Documents shall be regularly reviewed and kept up to date. 
When a document has been revised, a system shall exist to 
prevent inadvertent use of the superseded version. Superseded 
documents shall be retained for a specific period of time. 
17.2.5. Where documents require the entry of data, these entries shall 
be clear, legible and indelible. Sufficient space shall be 
provided for such entries. 
17.2.6. Any alteration made to a document shall be signed and dated; 
the alteration shall be done in such a way so as to permit the 
reading of the original information. Where appropriate, the 
reason for the alteration shall be recorded. 
17.2.7. Records shall be made or completed when any action is taken 
and in such a way that all significant activities concerning the 
manufacture of pharmaceutical products are traceable. 
Records shall be retained for at least one year after the expiry 
date of the finished product. 
17.2.8. Data (and records for storage) may be recorded by electronic 
data-processing systems or by photographic or other reliable 
means. Master formulae and detailed SOPs relating to the 
system in use shall be available and the accuracy of the 
records shall be checked. If documentation is handled by 
electronic data -processing methods, only authorised persons 
shall be able to enter or modify data in the computer system, 
and there shall be a record of changes and deletions; access 
shall be restricted by passwords or other means and the entry 
of critical data shall be independently checked. Batch records 
stored electronically shall be protected by back -up transfer on 
magnetic tape, microfilm, electronic discs, paper printouts or 
other means. It is particularly important that, during the 
period of retention, the data are readily available. 
17.2.9 The site master file shall be prepared and maintained 
up to date as per the Appendix-I this Part. 

17.3. Documents Required: 
17.3.1. Labels- 
17.3.1.1. Labels applied to containers, equipment or premises 
shall be clear, unambiguous and in the company’s 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
agreed format. It is often helpful in addition to the 
wording on the labels to use colours to indicate status 
(e.g., quarantined, accepted, reject0ed and clean). 
17.3.1.2. All finished drugs shall be identified by labelling 
bearing at least the following information, namely:- 
(a) the name of the drugs; 
(b) a list of the active ingredients [if applicable, with 
the International Nonproprietary Names (INN)], 
showing the amount of each present and a 
statement of the net contents (e.g., number of 
dosage units, weight and volume); 
(c) the batch number assigned by the manufacturer; 
(d) the exp iry date and date of manufacture in an 
uncoded form; 
(e) any special storage conditions or handling 
precautions that may be necessary; 
(f) directions for use, and warnings and precautions 
that may be necessary; and 
(g) the name and address of the manufacturer or the 
company and the person responsible for placing the 
product on the market. 
17.3.1.3. For reference standards, the label or accompanying 
document or both shall indicate potency or 
concentration, date of manufacture, expiry date, date 
the closure if it is first opened, storage conditions and 
control number, as appropriate. 

17.3.2. Specifications and testing procedures 
17.3.2.1. Testing procedures described in documents shall be 
validated in the context of available facilities and 
equipment before they are adopted for routine testing. 
17.3.2.2. There shall be appropriately authorised and dated 
specifications, including tests on identity, content, 
purity and quality for starting and packaging materials 
and for finished products; where appropriate, they 
shall also be available for intermediate or bulk 
products. Specifications for water, solvents and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
reagents (e.g., acids and bases) used in production 
shall be included. 
17.3.2.3. Each specification shall be approved, signed and 
dated, and maintained by the QC or QA units. 
Specifications for starting materials, in termediates, 
bulk, finished products and packaging materials. 
17.3.2.4. Periodic revisions of the specifications may be 
necessary to comply with new editions of the Indian 
pharmacopoeia or other official pharmacopoeia. 
17.3.2.5. Pharmacopoeias, reference standards, reference 
spectra and other reference materials shall be available 
in the QC laboratory. 

17.3.3. Specifications for starting and packaging materials- 
17.3.3.1. Specifications for starting, primary and printed 
packaging materials shall provide, if applicable, a 
description of the materials, including— 
(a) the designated name (if applicable, the INN) and 
internal code reference; 
(b) the reference, if any, to a pharmacopoeial 
monograph; and 
(c) qualitative and quantitative requirements with 
acceptance limits. 
17.3.3.2. Depending on the company’s practice ot her data may 
be added to the specification, namely:- 
(a) the supplier and the original producer of the 
materials; 
(b) a specimen of printed materials; 
(c) directions for sampling and testing, or a reference 
to procedures; 
(d) storage conditions and precautions; and 
(e) the m aximum period of storage before re -
examination. 
17.3.3.3. Packaging material shall conform to the specifications 
and shall be compatible with the material or with the 
drugs or both it contains. The material shall be 
examined for compliance with the specification, an d 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
for defects as well as for the correctness of identity 
markings. 
17.3.3.4. Documents describing testing procedures shall state 
the required frequency for re -assaying each starting 
material, as determined by its stability. 

17.3.4. Specifications for intermediate and bulk products- 
Specifications for intermediate and bulk products shall be 
available. The specifications shall be similar to specifications 
for starting materials or for finished products, as appropriate. 
17.3.5. Specifications for finished products - Specifications for 
finished products shall include the following, namely:— 
(a) the designated name of the product and the code reference, 
where applicable; 
(b) the designated names of the active ingredients (if 
applicable, with the INNs); 
(c) the formula or a reference to the formula if provided in any 
pharmacopoeia; 
(d) a description of the dosage form and package details; 
(e) directions for sampling and testing or a reference to 
procedures; 
(f) the qualitative and quantitative requirements, with 
acceptance limits; 
(g) the storage conditions and precau tions, where applicable; 
and 
(h) the shelf-life. 

17.3.6. Master formula records- 
17.3.6.1. A formally authorised master formula shall exist for 
each product and batch size to be manufactured. 
17.3.6.2. The master formula records shall include the 
following, namely:- 
(a) the name of the pro duct, with a product reference 
code relating to its specification; 
(b) a description of the dosage form, strength of the 
product and batch size; 
(c) a list of all starting materials to be used (if 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
applicable with the INNs), with the amount of 
each, described using the designated name and a 
reference that is unique to that material (mention 
shall be made of any substance that may disappear 
in the course of processing); 
(d) a statement of the expected final yield with the 
acceptable limits and of relevant intermediate 
yields, where applicable; 
(e) a statement of the processing location and the 
principal equipment to be used; 
(f) the methods or reference to the methods to be 
used for preparing and operating the critical 
equipment, e.g., cleaning (especially after a 
change in produ ct), assembling, calibrating, 
sterilising, use; 
(g) detailed step -wise processing instructions (e.g., 
checks on materials, pre -treatments, sequence for 
adding materials, mixing times and temperatures); 
(h) the instructions for any in -process controls with 
their limits; 
(i) where necessary, the requirements for storage of 
the products, including the container, the labelling 
and any special storage conditions; 
(j) any special precautions to be observed; and 
(k) the hold time permitted for intermediate and in 
process material. 

17.3.7. Packaging instructions - Formally authorised packaging 
instructions shall exist for each product, pack size and type. 
These shall normally include or make reference to the 
following, namely:— 
(a) the name of the product; 
(b) a description of its pharmaceutical form, strength and, where 
applicable, method of application; 
(c) the pack size expressed in terms of the number, weight or 
volume of the product in the final container; 
(d) a complete list of all the packaging materials required for a 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
standard batch size, including qua ntities, sizes and types, 
with the code or reference number relating to the 
specifications for each packaging material; 
(e) where appropriate, an example or reproduction of the 
relevant printed packaging materials and specimens, 
indicating where the batch numb er and expiry date of the 
product have been marked; 
(f) special precautions to be observed, including a careful 
examination of the packaging area and equipment in order 
to ascertain the line clearance before and after packaging 
operations; 
(g) a description of the packaging operation, including any 
significant subsidiary operations, and equipment to be 
used; and 
(h) details of in -process controls with instructions for sampling 
and acceptance limits. 

17.3.8. Batch processing records- 
17.3.8.1. A batch processing record shall be kept for each batch 
processed. It shall be based on the relevant Parts of the 
currently approved specifications on the record. The 
method of preparation of such records shall be 
designed to avoid errors. (copying or validated 
computer programmes are recommended. Transcribing 
from approved documents shall be avoided.) 
17.3.8.2. Before any processing begins a check shall be made 
that the equipment and work station are clear of 
previous products, documents, or materials not 
required for the planned process, and that the 
equipment is clean and suitable for use. This check 
shall be recorded. 
17.3.8.3. During processing, the following information shall be 
recorded at the time each action is taken, and after 
completion of the record shall be dated and signed by 
the person responsible for the processing operations, 
namely:- 
(a) the name of the product; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) the number of the batch being manufactured; 
(c) dates and time of commencement of significant 
intermediate stages and of completion of 
production; 
(d) the name of the person responsible for each stage 
of production; 
(e) the initials of the operators of different significant 
steps of production and, where appropriate, of the 
persons who checked each of these operations 
(e.g., weighing); 
(f) the batch number or analytical control number or 
both and the quantity of each starting material 
actually weighed (including the batch number and 
amount of any recovered or reprocessed material 
added); 
(g) any relevant processing operation or event and the 
major equipment used; 
(h) the hold time permitted for intermediate and in 
process material; 
(i) the in -process controls performed, the initials of 
the persons carrying them out, and the results 
obtained; 
(j) the amount of product obtained at different and 
pertinent stages of manufacture (yield), together 
with comments or explanations for significa nt 
deviations from the expected yield; and 
(k) notes on special problems including details, with 
signed authorisation for any deviation from the 
master formula. 

17.3.9. Batch packaging records- 
17.3.9.1. A batch packaging record shall be kept for each batch 
or part batch proce ssed. It shall be based on the 
relevant Parts of the approved packaging instructions 
and the method of preparing such records shall be 
designed to avoid errors. (copying or validated 
computer programmes are recommended. Transcribing 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
from approved documents shall be avoided.) 
17.3.9.2. Before any packaging operation begins, checks shall 
be made that the equipment and work station are clear 
of previous products, documents or materials not 
required for the planned packaging operations and that 
equipment is clean and sui table for use. These checks 
shall be recorded. 
17.3.9.3. The following information shall be recorded at the 
time each action is taken, and the date and the person 
responsible shall be clearly identified by signature or 
electronic password, namely:- 
(a) the name of the p roduct, the batch number and the 
quantity of bulk product to be packed, as well as 
the batch number and the planned quantity of 
finished product that will be obtained, the quantity 
actually obtained and the reconciliation; 
(b) the date and time of packaging operations; 
(c) the name of the responsible person carrying out the 
packaging operation; 
(d) (d) the initials of the operators of the different 
significant steps; 
(e) the checks made for identity and conformity with 
the packaging instructions, including the results of 
in-process controls; 
(f) details of the packaging operations carried out, 
including references to equipment and the 
packaging lines used, and, when necessary, the 
instructions for keeping the product if it is 
unpacked or a record of returning product that has 
not been packaged to the storage area; 
(g) whenever possible, samples of the printed 
packaging materials used, including specimens 
bearing the approval for the printing and regular 
check (where appropriate) of the batch number, 
expiry date, and any additional overprinting; 
(h) notes on any special problems, including the 
details of any deviation from the packaging 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
instructions, with written authorisation by an 
appropriate person; and 
(i) the quantities and reference number or 
identification of all printed packaging mate rials 
and bulk product issued, used, destroyed or 
returned to stock and the quantities of product 
obtained to permit an adequate reconciliation. 

17.3.10. Standard operating procedures and records: 
17.3.10.1. Standard Operating Procedures (hereinafter to be 
referred as SOPs) and associated records of actions 
taken or, where appropriate, conclusions reached 
shall be available for the following, namely- 
(a) equipment assembly and validation; 
(b) analytical apparatus and calibration; 
(c) maintenance, cleaning and sanitisation; 
(d) personnel mat ters including qualifications, 
training, clothing and hygiene; 
(e) environmental monitoring; 
(f) pest control; 
(g) complaints; 
(h) recalls; and 
(i) returns. 
17.3.10.2. There shall be SOPs and records for the receipt of 
each delivery of starting material and primary and 
printed packaging material. 
17.3.10.3. The records of the receipts shall include the 
following, namely- 
(a) the name of the material on the delivery note 
and the containers; 
(b) the “in -house” name or code or both of 
material, if different from clause (a); 
(c) the date of receipt; 
(d) the supplier’s name and, if possible, 
manufacturer’s name; 
(e) the manufacturer’s batch or reference number; 
(f) the total quantity and number of containers 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
received; 
(g) the batch number assigned after receipt; and 
(h) any relevant comment (e.g. state of the 
containers). 
17.3.10.4. There shall b e SOPs for the internal labelling, 
quarantine and storage of starting materials, 
packaging materials and other materials, as 
appropriate. 
17.3.10.5. SOPs shall be available for each instrument and 
piece of equipment (e.g., use, calibration, cleaning 
and maintenance) and placed in close proximity to 
the equipment. 
17.3.10.6. There shall be SOPs for sampling, which specify 
the persons authorised to take samples. 
17.3.10.7. The sampling instructions shall include- 
(a) the method of sampling and the sampling plan; 
(b) the equipment to be used; 
(c) any pre cautions to be observed to avoid 
contamination of the material or any 
deterioration in its quality; 
(d) the amount of samples to be taken; 
(e) instructions for any required sub-division of the 
sample; 
(f) the type of sample containers to be used, and 
whether they are for aseptic sampling or for 
normal sampling and labelling; and 
(g) any specific precautions to be observed, 
especially in regard to the sampling of sterile 
or noxious material. 
17.3.10.8. There shall be an SOPs describing the details of the 
batch (lot) numbering system, with the objective of 
ensuring that each batch of intermediate, bulk or 
finished product is identified with a specific batch 
number. 
17.3.10.9. The SOPs for batch numbering that are applied to 
the processing stage and to the respective 
packaging stage shall be related to each other. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
17.3.10.10. The SOPs for batch numbering shall ensure that 
the same batch numbers will not be used 
repeatedly; this applies also to reprocessing. 
17.3.10.11. Batch-number allocation shall be immediately 
recorded, e.g. in a logbook. The record shall 
include at lea st the date of allocation, product 
identity and size of batch. 
17.3.10.12. There shall be written procedures for testing 
materials and products at different stages of 
manufacture, describing the methods and 
equipment to be used. The tests performed shall be 
recorded. 
17.3.10.13. Analysis records shall include at least the 
following data, namely- 
(a) the name of the material or product and, where 
applicable, dosage form; 
(b) the batch number and, where appropriate, the 
manufacturer and supplier; 
(c) references to the relevant specifications an d 
testing procedures; 
(d) test results, including observations and 
calculations, and reference to any 
specifications (limits); 
(e) date and reference number of testing; 
(f) the initials of the persons who performed the 
testing; 
(g) the date and initials of the persons who verified 
the testing and the calculations, where 
appropriate; and 
(h) a clear statement of release or rejection (or 
other status decision) and the dated signature 
of the designated person. 
17.3.10.14. Written release and rejection procedures shall be 
available for materi als and products and in 
particular for the release for sale of the finished 
product by an authorised person. 
17.3.10.15. Records shall be maintained regarding the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
distribution of each batch of a product in order, for 
example, to facilitate the recall of the batch, if 
necessary. 
17.3.10.16. Records shall be kept for major and critical 
equipment, as appropriate, of any validations, 
calibrations, maintenance, cleaning or repair 
operations, including dates and the identity of the 
people who carried out these operations. 
17.3.10.17. The use of maj or and critical equipment and the 
areas where products have been processed shall be 
appropriately recorded in chronological order. 
17.3.10.18. There shall be written procedures assigning 
responsibility for cleaning and sanitation and 
describing in sufficient detail th e cleaning 
schedules, methods, equipment and materials to be 
used and facilities and equipment to be cleaned and 
such written procedures shall be followed. 

18. Good practices in production: 
18.1. Principle- Production operations must follow clearly defined 
procedures in accordance with manufacturing and licences, with the 
objective of obtaining products of the requisite quality. 
18.2. General- 
18.2.1. All handling of materials and products, such as receipt and 
cleaning, quarantine, sampling, storage, labelling, dispensing, 
processing, packaging and distribution shall be done in 
accordance with written procedures or instructions and, where 
necessary, recorded. 
18.2.2. Deviation from instructions or procedures shall be avoided as 
far as possible. If deviations occur, they shall be in accord ance 
with an approved procedure. The authorisation of the deviation 
shall be approved in writing by a designated person, with the 
involvement of the QC Department, when appropriate. 
18.2.3. Checks on yields and reconciliation of quantities shall be 
carried out as necessary to ensure that there are no 
discrepancies outside acceptable limits. 
18.2.4. Operations on different products shall not be carried out 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
simultaneously or consecutively in the same room or area 
unless there is no risk of mix up or cross-contamination. 
18.2.5. At a ll times during processing, all materials, bulk containers, 
major items of equipment, and, where appropriate, the rooms 
and packaging lines being used, shall be labelled or otherwise 
identified with an indication of the product or material being 
processed, its strength (where applicable) and the batch 
number. Where applicable, this indication shall also mention 
the stage of production. In some cases, it may be useful to also 
record the name of the previous product that has been 
processed. 
18.2.6. Access to production premises shall be restricted to authorised 
personnel. 
18.2.7. Non-medicinal products shall not be produced in areas or with 
equipment destined for the production of pharmaceutical 
products. 
18.2.8. In-process controls are usually performed within the production 
area. T he performance of such in -process controls shall not 
have any negative effect on the quality of the product or 
another product (e.g., cross-contamination or mix up). 

18.3. Prevention of cross -contamination and bacterial contamination 
during production- 
18.3.1. When dry materials and products are used in production, 
special precautions shall be taken to prevent the generation and 
dissemination of dust. Provision shall be made for proper air 
control (e.g., supply and extraction of air of suitable quality). 
18.3.2. Contamination of a starting material or of a product by another 
material or product must be avoided. This risk of accidental 
cross-contamination arises from the uncontrolled release of 
dust, gases, particles, vapours, sprays or organisms from 
materials and products in process, from residues on equipment, 
from intruding insects, and from operators’ clothing, skin, etc. 
The significance of this risk varies with the type of 
contaminant and of the product being contaminated. Among 
the most hazardous contaminants are highly se nsitising 
materials, biological preparations such as living organisms, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
certain hormones, cytotoxic substances and other highly active 
materials. Products in which contamination is likely to be most 
significant are those administered by injection or applied to 
open wounds and those given in large doses or over a long time 
or both. Highly hazardous, poisonous and explosive materials 
such as narcotics, psychotropic drugs and substances 
presenting potential risks of abuse, fire or explosion shall be 
stored in s afe and secure areas. Adequate fire protection 
measures shall be provided in conformity with the rules of the 
concerned civic authorities. 
18.3.3. Cross-contamination shall be avoided by taking appropriate 
technical or organisational measures, namely:- 
(a) carrying out production in dedicated and self -contained 
areas (which may be required for products such as 
penicillins, cytotoxic, sex hormones, spore forming, live 
vaccines, live bacterial preparations and certain other 
biologicals); 
(b) conducting campaign production (separation in time) 
followed by appropriate cleaning in accordance with a 
validated cleaning procedure; 
(c) providing appropriately designed airlocks, pressure 
differentials and air supply and extraction systems; 
(d) minimising the risk of contamination caused by 
recirculation or re -entry of untreated or insufficiently 
treated air; 
(e) wearing protective clothing where products or materials are 
handled; 
(f) using cleaning and decontamination procedures of known 
effectiveness; 
(g) using a closed system in production; 
(h) testing for residues; and 
(i) using cleanliness status labels on equipment. 
18.3.4. Measures to prevent cross -contamination and their 
effectiveness shall be checked periodically according to SOPs. 
18.3.5. Production areas where susceptible products are processed 
shall undergo periodi c environmental monitoring (e.g., for 
microbiological and particulate matter, where appropriate). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 

18.4. Processing operations- 
18.4.1. Before any processing operation is started, steps shall be taken 
to ensure that the work area and equipment are clean and free 
from any starting materials, products, product residues, labels 
or documents not required for the current operation. 
18.4.2. Any necessary in-process controls and environmental controls 
shall be carried out and recorded. 
18.4.3. Means shall be instituted of indicating failures of equipment or 
of services (e.g., water and gas) to equipment. Defective 
equipment shall be withdrawn from use until the defect has 
been rectified. After use, production equipment shall be 
cleaned without delay according to detailed written procedures 
and stored under clean and dry conditions in a separate area or 
in a manner that will prevent contamination. 
18.4.4. Time limits for storage of process materials and equipment, 
after cleaning and before use, shall be stated and based on 
relevant data. 
18.4.5. Containers for filling shall be cleaned before filling. Attention 
shall be given for avoiding and removing any contaminants 
such as glass fragments and metal particles. 
18.4.6. Any significant deviation from the expected yield shall be 
recorded and investigated. 
18.4.7. Checks shall be c arried out to ensure that pipelines and other 
pieces of equipment used for the transportation of products 
from one area to another area are connected in the correct 
manner. 
18.4.8. Pipes used for conveying distilled or deionized water and, 
where appropriate, other water pipes shall be sanitised and 
stored according to written procedures that detail the action 
limits for microbiological contamination and the measures to 
be taken. 
18.4.9. Measuring, weighing, recording and control equipment and 
instruments shall be serviced and calibrated at pre -specified 
intervals and records maintained. To ensure satisfactory 
functioning, instruments shall be checked daily or prior to use 
for performing analytical tests. The date of calibration and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
servicing and the date when recalibration is due shall be 
clearly indicated on a label attached to the instrument. 
18.4.10. Repair and maintenance operations shall not present any 
hazard to the quality of the products. 

18.5. Packaging operations: 
18.5.1. When the programme for packaging operations is being set up, 
particular attention shall be given to minimising the risk of 
cross-contamination, mix ups or substitutions. Different 
products shall not be packaged in close proximity unless there 
is physical segregation or an alternative system that will 
provide equal assurance. 
18.5.2. Before packaging operations are begun, steps shall be taken to 
ensure that the work area, packaging lines, printing machines 
and other equipment are clean and free from any products, 
materials or documents used previously and which are not 
required for the current operation. The line clearance shall be 
performed according to an appropriate procedure and checklist 
and shall be recorded. 
18.5.3. The name and batch number of the product being handled shall 
be displayed at each packaging station or line. 
18.5.4. Normally, filling and sealing shall be followed as quickly as 
possible by labelling. If labelling is delayed, appropriate 
procedures shall be applied to ensure that no mix ups or 
mislabelling can occur. 
18.5.5. The correct performance of any printing (e.g., of code numbe rs 
or expiry dates) done separately or in the course of the 
packaging shall be checked and recorded. Attention shall be 
paid to printing by hand, which shall be rechecked at regular 
intervals. 
18.5.6. Special care shall be taken when cut labels are used and when 
overprinting is carried out off -line and in hand -packaging 
operations. Roll -feed labels are normally preferable to cut 
labels in helping to avoid mix ups. Online verification of all 
labels by automated electronic means can be helpful in 
preventing mix ups, but checks shall be made to ensure that 
any electronic code readers, label counters or similar devices 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
are operating correctly. When labels are attached manually, in -
process control checks shall be performed more frequently. 
18.5.7. Printed and embossed information on packaging materials shall 
be distinct and resistant to fading or erasing. 
18.5.8.1. Regular online control of the product during packaging shall 
include at a minimum checks on— 
(a) the general appearance of the packages; 
(b) whether the packages are complete; 
(c) whether the correct products and packaging materials are 
used; 
(d) whether any overprinting is correct; and 
(e) the correct functioning of line monitors. 
18.5.8.2. Samples taken away from the packaging line shall not be 
returned. 
18.5.9.Products that have been involved in an unusual event during 
packaging shall be reintroduced into the process only after 
special inspection, investigation and approval by the authorised 
personnel. A detailed record shall be kept of this operation. 
18.5.10.Any significant or unusual discrepancy observed during 
reconciliation of the amount of bulk product and printed 
packaging materials and the number of units produced shall be 
investigated, satisfactorily accounted for and recorded before 
release. 
18.5.11.Upon completion of a packaging operation, any unused batch-
coded packaging materials shall be destroyed and the 
destruction shall be recorded. A documented procedure 
requiring checks to be performed before returning unused 
materials shall be followed, if uncoded printed materials are 
returned back to the stock. 
18.5.12. Production records shall be reviewed as part of the approval 
process of batch release before transfer to the authorised 
person. Any divergence or failure of a batch to meet 
production specifications shall be thoroughly investigated. The 
investigation shall, if necessary, extend to other batches of the 
same product and other products that may have been 
associated with the specific failure or discrepancy. A written 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
record of the investigation shall be made and shall include the 
conclusion and follow-up action. 
19. Good practices in quality control: 
19.1. Quality control is the part of good manufacturing practices concerned 
with sampling, specifications and testing and with the organisation 
and documentation which ensure that the necessary and relevant t ests 
are actually carried out and that materials are not released for use, nor 
products released for sale or supply, until their quality has been judged 
to be compliant with the requirements. QC is not confined to 
laboratory operations, but may be involved in many decisions 
concerning the quality of the product. 
19.2. The independence of QC from production is considered fundamental. 
19.3. Each manufacturer shall have a QC function. The QC function shall 
be independent of other Departments and under the authority of a 
person with appropriate qualifications and experience. Adequate 
resources must be available to ensure that all the QC arrangements are 
effectively and reliably carried out. The basic requirements for QC are 
as follows— 
(a) adequate facilities, trained personnel and approved procedures 
must be available for sampling, inspecting, and testing starting 
materials, packaging materials and intermediate, bulk and finished 
products and where appropriate for monitoring environmental 
conditions for good manufacturing practices purposes; 
(b) samples of starting materials, packaging materials, intermediate 
products, bulk products and finished products must be taken by 
methods and personnel approved by the QC Department; 
(c) qualification and validation; 
(d) records must be made (manually or by recording instruments or 
both) demonstrating that all the required sampling, inspecting and 
testing procedures have actually been carried out and that any 
deviations have been fully recorded and investigated; 
(e) the finished products must contain ingre dients complying with the 
qualitative and quantitative composition of the product described 
in the licence; the ingredients must be of the required purity, in 
their proper container and correctly labelled; 
(f) records must be made of the results of inspecting and testing the 
materials and intermediate, bulk and finished products against 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
specifications; product assessment must include a review and 
evaluation of the relevant production documentation and an 
assessment of deviations from specified procedures; 
(g) sufficient samples of starting materials and products must be 
retained to permit future examination of the product, if necessary; 
the retained product must be kept for the appropriate time in its 
final pack unless the pack is exceptionally large, in which case one 
that is equivalent to the marketed packaging system may be used. 
19.4.1. Other QC responsibilities include the following, namely:- 
(a) establishing, validating and implementing all QC procedures; 
(b) evaluating, maintaining and storing reference standards for 
substances; 
(c) ensuring the correct labelling of containers of materials and 
products; 
(d) ensuring that the stability of the active pharmaceutical 
ingredients and products are monitored; 
(e) participating in the investigation of complaints related to the 
quality of the product; 
(f) participating in environmental monitoring; and 
(g) participation in quality risk management programme. 
19.4.2. These activities shall be carried out in accordance with written 
procedures and, where necessary, recorded. 
19.5. Quality control personnel shall have access to the production areas 
for sampling and investigation as appropriate. 
19.6. Control of starting materials and intermediate, bulk and 
finished products- 
19.6.1. All tests shall follow the instructions given in the relevant 
written test procedure for each material or product. The 
result shall be checked by the supervisor before the material 
or product is released or rejected. 
19.6.2. Samples shall be representative of the batches of material 
from which they are taken in accordance with the approv ed 
written procedure. 
19.6.3. Sampling shall be carried out so as to avoid contamination 
or other adverse effects on quality. The containers that have 
been sampled shall be marked accordingly and carefully 
resealed after sampling. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
19.6.4. Care shall be taken during sampli ng to guard against 
contamination or mix up of, or by, the material being 
sampled. All sampling equipment that comes into contact 
with the material shall be clean. Hazardous or potent 
materials may require special precautions. 
19.6.5. Sampling equipment shall be c leaned and, if necessary, 
sterilised before and after each use and stored separately 
from other laboratory equipment. 
19.6.6. Each sample container shall bear a label indicating- 
(a) the name of the sampled material; 
(b) the batch or lot number; 
(c) the number of the container from which the sample has been 
taken; 
(d) the number of the sample; 
(e) the signature of the person who has taken the sample; and 
(f) the date of sampling. 
19.6.7. Out-of-specification results obtained during testing of 
materials or products shall be investigated in accorda nce 
with an approved procedure and record shall be maintained. 

19.7. Test requirements- 
19.7.1. Before releasing a starting or packaging material for use, 
the QC in-charge shall ensure that the materials have been 
tested for conformity with specifications for id entity, 
strength, purity and other quality parameters. 
19.7.2. An identity test shall be conducted on a sample from each 
container of starting material. It is permissible to sample 
only a proportion of the containers where a validated 
procedure has been establishe d to ensure that no single 
container of starting material has been incorrectly labelled. 

19.7.2.1. The above validation shall take account of at least 
the following aspects, namely:- 
(a) the nature and status of the manufacturer and of 
the supplier and their understan ding of the good 
manufacturing practices requirements; 
(b) the QA system of the manufacturer of the 
starting material; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(c) the manufacturing conditions under which the 
starting material is produced and controlled; and 
(d) the nature of the starting material and the 
medicinal products in which it will be used. 
19.7.2.2. Under such a system it is possible that a validated 
procedure for exemption from the requirement for 
identity testing of each incoming container of 
starting material could be accepted for the 
following, namely- 
(a) starting materials coming from a single product 
manufacturer or plant; or 
(b) starting materials coming directly from a 
manufacturer, or in the manufacturer’s sealed 
container where there is a history of reliability 
and regular audits of the manufacturer’s QA 
system are conducted by the purchaser (the 
manufacturer of the medicinal product) or by an 
officially accredited body. 
19.7.2.3. It is improbable that such a procedure could be 
satisfactorily validated for either- 
(a) starting materials supplied by intermediaries, 
such a s brokers, where the source of 
manufacture is unknown or not audited; or 
(b) starting materials for use in parenteral products. 
19.7.3. Each batch (lot) of printed packaging materials shall be 
examined following its receipt. 
19.7.4. In lieu of full testing by the manufacturer , a certificate of 
analysis may be accepted from the supplier, provided that 
the manufacturer establishes the reliability of the supplier’s 
analysis through appropriate periodic validation of the 
supplier’s test results and through on -site audits of the 
supplier’s capabilities. Certificates must be originals and 
not photocopies or otherwise have their authenticity 
assured. Certificates must contain at least the following 
information, namely:— 
(a) identification (name and address) of the issuing 
supplier; 
(b) signature of the competent official and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
statement of his or her qualifications; 
(c) the name of the material tested; 
(d) the batch number of the material tested; 
(e) the specifications and methods used; 
(f) the test results obtained; and 
(g) the date of testing. 
19.7.5. In-process control records shall be maintained and form 
part of the batch records. 
19.7.6. For each batch of drugs, there shall be an appropriate 
laboratory determination of satisfactory conformity to its 
finished product specification prior to its release. 
19.7.7. Products failing to meet the established specifications or 
any other relevant quality criteria shall be rejected. 

19.8. Batch record review: 
19.8.1. Quality control records shall be reviewed as part of the 
approval process of batch release before transfer to the 
authorised person. Any di vergence or failure of a batch to 
meet its specifications shall be thoroughly investigated. 
The investigation shall, if necessary, extend to other 
batches of the same product and other products that may 
have been associated with the specific failure or 
discrepancy. A written record of the investigation shall be 
made and shall include the conclusion and follow -up 
action. 
19.8.2. Retention samples from each batch of finished product 
shall be kept for at least one year after the expiry date. 
Finished products shall us ually be kept in their final 
packaging and stored under the recommended conditions. 
If exceptionally large packages are produced, smaller 
samples might be stored in appropriate containers. Samples 
of active starting materials shall be retained for at least one 
year beyond the expiry date of the corresponding finished 
product. Other starting materials (other than solvents, gases 
and water) shall be retained for a minimum of two years, if 
their stability allows. Retention samples of materials and 
products shall be of a size sufficient to permit at least two 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
full re-examinations. 

19.9. Stability studies- 
19.9.1. QC shall evaluate quality and stability of finished 
pharmaceutical products and, when necessary, of starting 
materials and intermediate products. 
19.9.2. QC shall establish expiry dates and shelf -life specifications 
on the basis of stability tests related to storage conditions. 
19.9.3. A written programme for on -going stability determination 
shall be developed and implemented to include elements 
such as — 
(a) a complete description of the drug involved in the study; 
(b) the complete set of testing parameters and methods, 
describing all tests for potency, purity, and physical 
characteristics and documented evidence that these tests 
indicate stability; 
(c) provision for the inclusion of a su fficient number of 
batches; 
(d) the testing schedule for each drug; 
(e) provision for special storage conditions; 
(f) provision for adequate sample retention; and 
(g) a summary of all the data generated, including the 
evaluation and the conclusion of the study. 
19.9.4. Stability shall be determined prior to marketing and 
following any significant changes, for example, in 
processes, equipment or packaging materials. 

20. Computerised systems: 
20.1. GMP-related computerised systems shall be validated. The depth and 
scope of validation depend s on the diversity, complexity and 
criticality of the computerised application. 
20.2. Appropriate installation qualiﬁcation and operational qualiﬁcation 
shall demonstrate the suitability of computer hardware and software 
to perform assigned tasks. 
20.3. Commercially a vailable software that has been qualiﬁed does not 
require the same level of testing. If an existing system was not 
validated at the time of installation, a retrospective validation could be 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
conducted, if appropriate documentation is available. 
20.4. Computerised systems shall have sufﬁcient controls to prevent 
unauthorised access or changes to data. There shall be controls to 
prevent omissions in data (e.g., the system being turned off and data 
not captured). There shall be a record of any data change made, the 
previous entry, the person who made the change and when the change 
was made. 
20.5. Written procedures shall be available for the operation and 
maintenance of computerised systems. 
20.6. Where critical data are being entered manually, there shall be an 
additional check on the accuracy of the data entered. This can be done 
by a second operator or by the system itself. 
20.7. Incidents related to computerised systems that could affect the quality 
of products or the reliability of records or test results shall be recorded 
and investigated. 
20.8. Changes to the computerised system shall be made according to a 
change procedure and shall be formally authorised, documented and 
tested. Records shall be kept of all changes, including modiﬁcations 
and enhancements made to the hardware, software and any other 
critical component of the system. These records shall demonstrate that 
the system is maintained in a validated state. 
20.9. A back-up system shall be provided so that there is no permanent loss 
of records due to system breakdown or failure. Means of ensuring 
data protection shall be established for all computerised systems. 
20.10. Data may be recorded by other means in addition to the computer 
system. 
Appendix-I 
Site Master File 
The licensee shall prepare a succinct document in the form of ‘Site Master 
File’ containing specific and factual Good Manufacturing Practices about 
the production or control or both of pharmaceutical manufacturing 
preparations carried out at the licensed premises. It shall contain the 
following, namely- 
1. General information:- 
(a) brief information of the firm; 
(b) pharmaceutical manufacturing activities as permitted by the licensing 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
authority; 
(c) other manufacturing activities, if any, carried out in the premises; 
(d) type of products licensed for manufacture with flow charts mentioning 
procedure and process flow; 
(e) number of employees engaged in the production, quality control, 
storage and distribution; 
(f) use of outside scientific, analytical or other technical assistance in 
relation to manufacture and analysis; 
(g) products details registered with foreign countries. 
(h) short description of the Quality Management System of the firm; 
(i) pharmaceutical Quality System; and 
(j) quality risk assessment. 

2. Personnel:- 
(a) organisational chart showing the arrangement for quality assurance 
including production and quality control; 
(b) qualifications, experience and responsibilities of key personnel; 
(c) outline for arrangements for basic and in -service training and how the 
records are maintained; 
(d) health requirements for personnel engaged in production; and 
(e) personnel hygiene requirements, including clothing. 

3. Premises:- 
(a) simple plan or description of manufacturing areas drawn to scale; 
(b) nature of construction and fixtures or fittings; 
(c) brief description of ventilation systems. More details shall be given for 
critical areas with potential ri sk of airborne contamination (schematic 
drawing of systems). Classification of the rooms used for the 
manufacture of sterile products shall be mentioned; 
(d) special areas for the handling of the highly toxic, hazardous and 
sensitising materials; 
(e) brief descrip tion of water system (schematic drawings of systems), 
including sanitation; and 
(f) description of planned preventive maintenance programmes for 
premises and of the recording system. 

4. Equipment:- 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) brief description of major equipment used in production and Qual ity 
Control Laboratories (a list of equipment required); 
(b) description of planned preventive maintenance programmes for 
equipment and of the recording system; and 
(c) qualification and calibration including the recording systems and 
arrangements for computerised systems validation. 

5. Sanitation:-availability of written specifications and procedures for 
cleaning manufacturing areas and equipment. 
6. Documentation:- 
(a) arrangements for the preparation, revision and distribution of; 
(b) necessary documentation for the manufacture; and 
(c) any other documentation related to product quality that is not 
mentioned elsewhere (e.g., microbiological controls about air and 
water). 

7. Production:- 
(a) brief description of production operations using, wherever possible, flow 
sheets and charts specifying important parameters; 
(b) arrangements for the handling of starting materials, packaging materials, 
bulk and finished products, including sampling, quarantine, release and 
storage; 
(c) arrangements for the handling of rejected materials and products; and 
(d) brief description of general policy for process validation. 

8. Quality Assurance and Control:- 
(a) documentation system; 
(b) change control; 
(c) master validation plan and validation policy; 
(d) product quality review; and 
(e) description of the quality control system and of th e activities of the QC 
Department. Procedures for the release of the finished products. 

9. Manufacture under loan licence and licensee: - description of the way in 
which compliance of GMP by the loan licensee shall be assessed. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
10. Distribution, complaints and product recall:- 
(a) arrangements and recording system for distribution; and 
(b) arrangements for the handling of complaints and product recalls. 

11. Self-inspection:- short description of the self -inspection system indicating 
whether an outside, independent and experi enced external expert was 
involved in evaluating the manufacturer’s compliance with GMP in all 
aspects of production. 

12. Export of drugs:- 
(a) products exported to different countries; and 
(b) complaints and product recall, if any. 
Note.-The guidelines published by the World Health Organization (WHO) on 
following aspects relating to GMP through their Technical Report Series from 
time to time may be considered for general guidance purposes:- 
(1) Guidelines on the principles of airflow directions, air filtration 
standards, temperature, humidity and related parameters. 
(2) GMP guidelines regarding the design, installation and operation of 
pharmaceutical water systems including guidance about which quality 
of water to use for specific applications, such as the manufacture of 
APIs and dosage forms. 
(3) Guidelines on design, installation, qualification and maintenance of the 
HVAC systems of the manufacturing plant. 
(4) GMP guidelines for validation. 
(5) Guidelines on packaging of pharmaceutical products. 

PART II 
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF STERILE 
PRODUCTS, PARENTERAL PREPARATIONS (SMALL VOLUME 
INJECTABLES AND LARGE VOLUME PARENTERALS) AND 
STERILE OPHTHALMIC PREPARATIONS 
Note.-Good Manufacturing Practices for pharmaceutical products: - Main 
principles as given in Part I shall be complied with, mutatis mutandis, for 
the manufacture of sterile products, parenteral preparations (small volume 
injectables and large volume parenterals) and sterile ophthalmic 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
preparations. In addition to these requirements, the following specific 
requirements shall also be followed, namely:— 
1. General considerations:- 
1.1. The production of sterile preparations shall be carried out in clean areas, 
entry shall be through airlocks for personnel or for equipment and 
materials or both. Clean areas shall be maintaine d to an appropriate 
standard of cleanliness and supplied with air that has passed through 
filters of the required efficiency. 
1.2. The various operations of component preparation (such as those 
involving containers and closures), product preparation, filling an d 
sterilisation shall be carried out in separate areas within the clean area. 
These areas are classified into four grades as described in paragraph of 
this Part. 
1.3. Manufacturing operations are divided here into two categories, namely:- 
(I) those, where the product is terminally sterilised; and 
(II) those, which are conducted aseptically at some or all stages. 

2. Quality control:- 
2.1. The sterility test applied to the finished product shall only be regarded 
as the last in a series of control measures by which sterility is a ssured. 
The test shall be validated for the product concerned. 
2.2. Samples taken for sterility testing shall be representative of the whole 
of the batch but shall, in particular, include samples taken from parts of 
the batch considered to be most at risk of contamination, for example- 
(i) for products that have been filled aseptically, samples shall include 
containers filled at the beginning and end of the batch and after any 
significant interruption of work; 
(ii) for products that have been heat sterilised in their fi nal containers, 
consideration shall be given to taking samples from that part of the 
load that is potentially the coolest. 
2.3. The sterility of the finished product is assured by validation of the 
sterilisation cycle in the case of terminally sterilised produ cts, and by 
“media simulation” or “media fill” runs for aseptically processed 
products. Batch -processing records and, in the case of aseptic 
processing, environmental quality records, shall be examined in 
conjunction with the results of the sterility tests . The sterility test 
procedure shall be validated for a given product. Pharmacopoeial 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
methods shall be used for the validation and performance of the sterility 
test. In those cases where parametric release has been authorised in 
place of sterility testing, special attention shall be paid to the validation 
and the monitoring of the entire manufacturing process. 
2.4. For injectable products, the water for injection and the intermediate, if 
appropriate and finished products shall be monitored for endotoxins, 
using an established pharmacopoeial method that has been validated for 
each type of product. For large -volume parenterals, such monitoring of 
water or intermediates shall always be done, in addition to any tests 
required by an approved monograph for the finished product. When a 
sample fails a test, the cause of the failure shall be investigated and 
necessary action shall be taken. 
2.5. The use of rapid microbiological methods to replace the traditional 
microbiological methods, and to obtain earlier results on the 
microbiological quality of, for example, water, the environment or bio 
burden, could be considered if appropriately validated and a 
comparative assessment of the proposed rapid method is performed 
against the pharmacopoeial method. 

3. Sanitation:- 
3.1. The sanitatio n of clean areas is particularly important. They shall be 
cleaned frequently and thoroughly in accordance with an approved 
written programme. Where disinfectants are used, more than one type 
shall be employed. Monitoring shall be regularly undertaken to de tect 
contamination or the presence of an organism against which the 
cleaning procedure is ineffective. Interactions between different 
cleaning materials shall be validated. Appropriate cleaning validation 
shall be carried out to ensure disinfectant residua ls can be detected and 
are removed by the cleaning process. 
3.2. Disinfectants and detergents shall be monitored for microbial 
contamination; dilutions shall be kept in previously cleaned containers 
and shall only be stored for defined periods unless sterilised . 
Disinfectants and detergents used in Grade A and B areas shall be sterile 
before use. 
3.3. A disinfectant programme shall also include a sporicidal agent since 
many common disinfectants are ineffective against spores. The 
effectiveness of cleaning and disinfe ctant procedures shall be 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
demonstrated. 
3.4. Fumigation of clean areas may be useful for reducing microbial 
contamination in inaccessible places. 

4. Manufacture of sterile preparations:- 
4.1. Clean areas for the manufacture of sterile products are classified 
according to the required characteristics of the environment. Each 
manufacturing operation requires an appropriate level of environmental 
cleanliness in the operational state to minimise the risk of particulate or 
microbial contamination of the product or materials being handled. 
4.2. Detailed information on methods for determining the microbiological 
and particulate cleanliness of air, surfaces, etc., is not given in this Part. 
International Organization for Standardisation (ISO) standards shall be 
used for classificati on of cleanliness according to concentration of 
airborne particles (determination of number of sample locations, 
calculation of sample size and evaluation of classification from the data 
obtained). Table 1 shall also be used to define the levels to be used as 
the basis for monitoring clean areas for airborne particles. 
4.3. For the manufacture of sterile pharmaceutical preparations, four grades 
of clean areas are distinguished as follows:- 
Grade A : The local zone for high -risk operations, e.g., filling and 
making aseptic connections. Normally such conditions are achieved by 
using a unidirectional airflow workstation. Unidirectional airflow 
systems shall provide a homogeneous air speed of 0.36 –0.54 m/s 
(guidance value) at a defined test position 15–30 cm below the terminal 
filter or air distributor system. The velocity at working level shall not 
be less than 0.36 m/s. The uniformity and effectiveness of the 
unidirectional airflow shall be demonstrated by undertaking airflow 
visualisation tests. 
Grade B : In asepti c preparation and filling, this is the background 
environment for the Grade A zone. 
Grades C and D : Clean areas for carrying out less critical stages in the 
manufacture of sterile products or carrying out activities during which 
the product is not directly exposed (i.e., aseptic connection with aseptic 
connectors and operations in a closed system). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
A unidirectional airflow and lower velocities may be used in closed 
isolators and glove boxes. 

Explanation.- For the purpose of classification of grade C and grade D 
clean areas, the parameters provided in paragraph 4.6, 4.7, 4.9, and 
4.11of this Part shall be applied. 

4.4. In order to reach the B, C and D air grades the number of air changes 
shall be appropriate for the size of the room and the equipment and 
personnel present in it. 
4.5. High-efficiency particulate air (hereinafter to be referred as HEPA) 
filters shall be subjected to an installed filter leakage test in accordance 
with ISO standards at a recommended interval of every six months, but 
not exceeding twelve months. The purpose of performing regular leak 
tests is to ensure the filter media, filter frame and filter seal are free 
from leaks. The aerosol selected for HEPA leak testing shall not support 
microbial growth and shall be composed of a sufficient numbe r or mass 
of particles. HEPA filter patching is allowed at the filter manufacturer 
and in situ operation provided that the patch sizes and procedures follow 
the recommendations of ISO standards. 
4.6. Clean rooms and clean-air devices shall be classified in accordance with 
ISO standards. 
4.6.1. Classification shall be clearly differentiated from operational 
process environmental monitoring. The maximum permitted 
airborne particle concentration for each Grade is given in Table 
1 below. 

Table 1 

Maximum permitted airborne particle concentrate 

Grade Maximum permitted number of particles per 
m3greater than or equal to the tabulated size 
 At rest In operation 
 0.5 μm 5.0 
μm 0.5 μm 5.0 μm 
A 3520 20 3520 20 
B 3520 29 352000 2900 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
C 352000 2900 3520000 29000 
D 3 
520000 29000 Not 
defined Not defined 

The “at rest” state is the condition where the installation is 
complete with equipment installed and operating in a manner 
agreed upon by the customer and supplier, but with no 
personnel present. 
The “in operation” state is the condition where the installation 
is functioning in the defined operating mode and the specified 
number of personnel is present. The areas and their associated 
environmental control systems shall be designed to achieve 
both the “at rest” and “in operation” states. 
4.6.2. For classification purposes in Grade A zones, a minimum 
sample volume of 1 m³ shall be taken per sample location. 
Referring to Table 1, for Grade A the airborne particle 
classification is ISO 4.8 dictated by the limit for particles ≥ 5.0 
μm. For Grade B (at rest) the airborne particle classification is 
ISO 5 for both particle sizes considered. For Grade C (at rest 
and in operation) the airborne particle classification is ISO 7 and 
ISO 8, respectively. For Grade D (at rest) the airborne particl e 
classification is ISO 8. For classification purposes ISO 
standards methodology defines both the minimum number of 
sample locations and the sample size based on the class limit of 
the largest particle size considered and the method of evaluation 
of the da ta collected. The sample volume shall be determined 
according to ISO standards. However, for lower grades (Grade 
C in operation and Grade D at rest) the sample volume per 
location shall be at least two litres and the sample time per 
location shall be not less than one minute. 
4.6.3. Portable particle counters with a short length of sample tubing 
shall be used for classification purposes to avoid the loss of 
particles ≥ 5.0 μm. Isokinetic sample heads shall be used in 
unidirectional airflow systems. 
4.6.4. “In operation” classification may be demonstrated during 
normal operations, simulated operations or during media fills as 
worst-case simulation is required for this. ISO standards provide 
information on testing to demonstrate continued compliance 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
with the assigned cleanliness classification. 

4.7. Clean rooms and clean-air devices shall be routinely monitored while in 
operation and the monitoring locations based on a formal risk analysis 
study and the results obtained during the classification of rooms or 
clean-air devices or both. 
4.7.1. For Grade A zones, particle monitoring shall be undertaken for the 
full duration of critical processing, including equipment assembly, 
except where justified by contaminants in the process that would 
damage the particle counter or present a hazard, for example, live 
organisms and radiological hazards. In such cases monitoring 
during routine equipment set -up operations shall be undertaken 
before exposure to the risk. Monitoring during simulated 
operations shall also be performed. The Grade A zone shal l be 
monitored at a frequency and sample size such that all 
interventions, transient events and any system deterioration would 
be captured and alarms triggered if alert limits are exceeded. It is 
accepted that it may not always be possible to demonstrate l ow 
levels of ≥5.0 μm particles at the point of fill when filling is in 
progress, due to the generation of particles or droplets from the 
product itself. 
4.7.2. It is recommended that a similar system be used for Grade B 
zones, although the sample frequency may be decreased. The 
importance of the particle monitoring system shall be determined 
by the effectiveness of the segregation between the adjacent Grade 
A and B zones. The Grade B zone shall be monitored at a 
frequency and with a sample size such that changes i n levels of 
contamination and any deterioration of the system would be 
captured and alarms triggered if alert limits are exceeded. 
4.7.3. Airborne particle monitoring systems may consist of independent 
particle counters; a network of sequentially accessed samplin g 
points connected by manifold to a single particle counter; or 
multiple small particle counters located near monitoring points and 
networked to a data acquisition system. Combination of systems 
can also be used. The system selected shall be appropriate fo r the 
particle size considered. Where remote sampling systems are used, 
the length of tubing and the radii of any bends in the tubing shall 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
be considered in the context of particle losses in the tubing. The 
selection of the monitoring system shall take acc ount of any risk 
presented by the materials used in the manufacturing operation, for 
example, those involving live organisms or radiopharmaceuticals. 
4.7.4. The sizes of samples taken for monitoring purposes using 
automated systems will usually be a function of t he sampling rate 
of the system used. It is not necessary for the sample volume to be 
the same as that used for formal classification of clean rooms and 
clean-air devices. 
4.7.5. The airborne particle conditions given in Table 1 for the “at rest” 
state shall be ac hieved in the absence of the operating personnel 
after a short “clean -up” or “recovery” period of about 15 –20 
minutes (guidance value), after completion of the operations. The 
particulate conditions given in Table 1 for Grade A “in operation” 
shall be main tained in the zone immediately surrounding the 
product whenever the product or open container is exposed to the 
environment. The “clean -up” or “recovery” test shall demonstrate 
a change in particle concentration by a factor of 100 within the 
prescribed time as per the ISO standards. 
4.7.6. In order to demonstrate control of the cleanliness of the various 
clean areas during operation, they shall be monitored for airborne 
particles and microbial contamination. In addition to “at rest” and 
“in operation” classification, airborne particles shall be monitored 
periodically “in operation” at critical locations. The sampling plan 
need not be the same as that used for classification. Locations and 
sample sizes shall be determined based on an assessment of the 
process and contamination risk. 
4.7.7. The monitoring of Grade C and D areas in operation shall be 
performed in accordance with the principles of QRM. The 
requirements and alert or action limits will depend on the nature of 
the operations carried out, but the recommended “clean-up period” 
shall be attained. 
4.7.8. Other characteristics such as temperature and relative humidity 
depend on the product and nature of the operations carried out. 
These parameters shall not interfere with the defined cleanliness 
standard. 
4.7.9. Examples of operatio ns to be carried out in the various 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Grades are given in the Table 2 below: 
Table 2 
Examples of operations to be carried out in the various Grades 
Grade Examples of operations for terminally sterilised 
products 
A Filling of products, which are unusually at risk 
C 
Placement of filling and sealing machines, preparation of 
solutions, when (usually at risk). Filling of product when 
usually at risk. 
D Moulding, blowing (pre forming) operations of solutions 
and components for subsequent filling. 

Grade Examples of operations for aseptic preparations 
A Aseptic preparation and filling 
B 
Background room conditions for activities requiring Grade 
A 
C Preparation of solutions to be filtered 
D Handling of components after washing 

4.8. To control the microbiological cleanliness of Grades A to D in -
operation, the clean areas shall be monitored. Where aseptic operations 
are performed, monitoring shall be frequent using methods such as 
settle plates, volumetric air and surface sampling (e.g., swabs and 
contact plates). S ampling methods used in operation shall not interfere 
with zone protection. Results from monitoring shall be considered when 
reviewing batch documentation for finished product release. Surfaces 
and personnel shall be monitored after critical operations. Ad ditional 
microbiological monitoring is also required outside production 
operations, e.g., after validation of systems, cleaning and sanitisation. 
4.9. Levels of detection of microbial contamination shall be established for 
the purpose of setting alert and actio n limits and for monitoring the 
trends in environmental cleanliness in the facility. Limits expressed in 
Colony-Forming Units(CFU) for the microbiological monitoring of 
clean areas in operation are given in Table 3 below. The sampling 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
methods and numerical values included in the said Table are not 
intended to represent specifications, but are for information only. 

Table 
Recommended limits for microbial contamination 

Grad
e 
Air sample 
(CFU/m3) 
Settle plates 
(diameter 90 
mm)(CFU/4 
hours) 
Contact plates 
(diameter 55 
mm)(CFU/plate) 
Glove print 
(5 fingers) 
(CFU/glove) 
A < 1 < 1 < 1 < 1 
B 10 5 5 5 
C 100 50 25 – 
D 200 100 50 – 

These are average values. 
Individual settle plates may be exposed for less than four hours. 

4.10. Appropriate alert and action limits shall be set for the results of 
particulate and microbiological monitoring. If the action limits are 
exceeded or a trend is identified in the alert limits, investigation shall be 
initiated and the appropriate corrective actions shall be taken, as 
prescribed in the operating procedures. 
4.11. The area Grades specified in this Part shall be selected by the 
manufacturer on the basis of the nature of the process operations being 
performed and validation runs (e.g., aseptic media fills or others types 
of process simulations) are used to establish processing hold times and a 
maximum fill duration. The determination of an appropriate process 
area environment and a time limit shall be based on the microbial 
contamination (bio burden) found. 

4.11.1. Terminally sterilised products 
4.11.1.1. Components and products shall be prepared in at least a 
Grade D zone to ensure low microbial bio burden and 
particulate counts prior to filtration and sterilisation. 
Where the product is at unusual risk of microbial 
contamination (e.g., because it activel y supports 
microbial growth, must be held for a long period before 
sterilisation, or is necessarily processed mainly in open 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
vessels), the preparation shall generally be done in a 
Grade C zone. 
4.11.1.2. The filling of products for terminal sterilisation shall 
generally be done in at least a Grade C environment. 
4.11.1.3. Where the product is at unusual risk of contamination 
from the environment (e.g., because the filling operation 
is slow, the containers are wide -necked or are 
necessarily exposed for more than a few seconds b efore 
sealing), the filling shall be done in a Grade A zone with 
at least a Grade C background. 
4.11.1.4. The preparation and filling of ointments, creams, 
suspensions and emulsions shall generally be done in a 
Grade C zone before terminal sterilisation. 
4.11.2. Aseptic preparation- 
4.11.1.5. Components after washing shall be handled in at least 
Grade D zone. The handling of sterile starting materials 
and components, unless subjected to sterilisation or 
filtration through a microorganism -retaining filter later 
in the process, shall be undertaken in a Grade A zone 
with Grade B background. 
4.11.1.6. The preparation of solutions which are to be sterile -
filtered during the process shall be undertaken in Grade 
C zone (unless a closed system is used, in which Grade 
D zone may be justifiable). If not s terile-filtered 
(therefore an aseptic manipulation) the preparation of 
materials and products shall be undertaken in Grade A 
zone with Grade B background. 
4.11.1.7. The handling and filling of aseptically prepared 
products, as well as the handling of exposed sterile 
equipment, shall be undertaken in Grade A zone with 
Grade B background. 
4.11.1.8. The transfer of partially closed containers, as used in 
freeze-drying, before stoppering is completed, shall be 
undertaken either in Grade A zone with Grade B 
background or in sealed transfer trays in Grade B zone. 
4.11.1.9. The preparation and filling of sterile ointments, creams, 
suspensions and emulsions shall be undertaken in Grade 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
A zone with Grade B background when the product is 
exposed and is not subsequently filtered. 

5. Processing: 
5.1. Precautions to minimise contamination shall be taken during all 
processing stages, including the stages before sterilisation. 
5.2. In general, preparations containing live micro -organisms shall not be 
made, nor shall containers be filled in areas used for the proces sing of 
other pharmaceutical products. However, if the manufacturer can 
demonstrate and validate effective containment and decontamination of 
the live micro -organisms, the use of multi -product facilities may be 
justifiable. Vaccines consisting of dead orga nisms or of bacterial 
extracts may be dispensed into containers in the same premises as other 
sterile pharmaceutical products, provided that the inactivation procedure 
has been properly validated. When multi -product facilities are used to 
manufacture steri le preparations containing live microorganisms and 
other sterile pharmaceutical products, the manufacturer shall 
demonstrate and validate the effective decontamination of the live 
micro-organisms, in addition to precautions taken to minimise 
contamination. 
5.3. Validation of aseptic processing shall include a process simulation test 
using a nutrient medium (media fill). Selection of the nutrient medium 
shall be based on dosage form of the product and selectivity, clarity, 
concentration and suitability for sterilisation of the nutrient medium. 
5.4. The process simulation test shall imitate as closely as possible the 
routine aseptic manufacturing steps except where the activity may lead 
to any potential microbial contamination. 
5.5. Process simulation tests shall be performe d as part of validation by 
running three consecutive satisfactory simulation tests. These tests shall 
be repeated at defined intervals and after any significant modification to 
the HVAC system, equipment or process. Process simulation tests shall 
incorporate activities and interventions known to occur during normal 
production as well as in the worst -case situations. The process 
simulation tests shall be representative of each shift and shift 
changeover to address any time-related and operational features. 
5.6. The number of containers used for media fills shall be sufficient to 
enable a valid evaluation. For small batches the number of containers 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
for media fills shall at least equal to the size of the product batch. The 
target shall be zero growth and the following shall apply: 
(a) when filling fewer than 5000 units, no contaminated units shall be 
detected; 
(b) when filling 5000–10000 units - 
(i) one contaminated unit shall result in an investigation, including 
consideration of a repeat media fill; 
(ii) two contaminated units are considered cause for revalidation 
following investigation; 
(c) when filling more than 10000 units - 
(i) one contaminated unit shall result in an investigation; 
(ii) two contaminated units are considered cause for revalidation 
following investigation. 
5.7. For any run size, intermittent incidents of microbial contamination may 
be indicative of low -level contamination that shall be investigated. 
Investigation of gross failures shall include the potential impact on the 
sterility assurance of batches manufactured since the last successful 
media fill. 
5.8. Care shall be taken to ensure that any validation does not compromise 
the processes. 
5.9. Water sources, water -treatment equipment and treated water shall be 
monitored regularly for chemicals, biological contamination and 
contamination with endotoxins to ensure that the water complies with 
the specifications appropriate to its use. Records shall be maintained of 
the results of the monitoring and of any action taken. 
5.10. Activities in clean areas, especially when aseptic operations are in 
progress, shall be kept to a minimum and the movement of personnel 
shall be controlled and methodical, so as to avoid excessive shedding of 
particles and organisms due to over -vigorous activity. As far as 
possible, personnel shall be excluded from Grade A zones . The ambient 
temperature and humidity shall not be uncomfortably high because of 
the nature of the garments worn and to reduce the risk of contamination 
liberated from the personnel. 
5.11. The presence of containers and materials liable to generate fibres shall 
be minimised in clean areas and avoided completely when aseptic work 
is in progress. 
5.12. Components, bulk -product containers and equipment shall be handled 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
after the final cleaning process in such a way so as to ensure that they 
are not re-contaminated. The stage of processing of components as well 
as the bulk -product containers and equipment shall be properly 
identified. 
5.13. The interval between the washing and drying and the sterilisation of 
components, bulk-product containers and equipment, as well as between 
sterilisation and use, shall be as short as possible and subject to a time -
limit appropriate to the validated storage conditions. 
5.14. The time between the start of the preparation of a solution and its 
sterilisation or filtration through a bacteria -retaining fi lter shall be as 
short as possible. A maximum permissible time shall be set for each 
product that takes into account its composition and the prescribed 
method of storage. 
5.15. Any gas that is used to purge a solution or blanket a product shall be 
passed through a sterilising filter. 
5.16. The bio burden shall be monitored before sterilisation. There shall be 
working limits on contamination immediately before sterilisation, which 
are related to the efficiency of the method to be used. Bio burden assay 
shall be performed on each batch for both aseptically filled products and 
terminally sterilised products. Where overkill sterilisation parameters 
are set for terminally sterilised products, bio burden might be monitored 
only at suitable scheduled intervals. For parametric release systems, bio 
burden assay shall be performed on each batch and considered as an in -
process test. Where appropriate, the level of endotoxins shall be 
monitored. All solutions, in particular large -volume infusion fluids, 
shall be passed through a mic roorganism-retaining filter, if possible 
sited immediately before filling. 
5.17. Components, bulk-product containers, equipment and any other articles 
required in a clean area where aseptic work is in progress, shall be 
sterilised and wherever possible passed in to the area through double -
ended sterilisers sealed into the wall. Other procedures that prevent the 
introduction of contamination may be acceptable in some 
circumstances. 
5.18. The efficacy of any new processing procedure shall be validated and the 
validation shall be repeated at regular intervals thereafter or when any 
significant change is made in the process or equipment. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6. Sterilisation: 
6.1. Whenever possible products intended to be sterile shall be terminally 
sterilised by heat in their final container. Where it is not possible to 
carry out terminal sterilisation by heating due to the instability of a 
formulation or incompatibility of a pack type (necessary to the 
administration of the product, e.g., plastic eye -dropper bottles), a 
decision shall be taken to use an alternative method of terminal 
sterilisation following filtration or aseptic processing or both. 
6.2. Sterilisation can be achieved by the use of moist or dry heat, by 
irradiation with ionizing radiation (noting that ultraviolet irradiation is 
not normally a n acceptable method of sterilisation), by ethylene oxide 
(or other suitable gaseous sterilising agents), or by filtration with 
subsequent aseptic filling of sterile final containers. Each method has its 
advantages and disadvantages. Where possible and prac ticable, heat 
sterilisation is the method of choice. In any case the sterilisation process 
shall be in accordance with the marketing and manufacturing 
authorisations. 
6.3. The microbial contamination of starting materials shall be minimal and 
their bio burden s hall be monitored before sterilisation. Specifications 
shall include requirements for microbiological quality when the need for 
this has been indicated by monitoring. 
6.4. All sterilisation processes shall be validated. Particular attention shall be 
paid when the adopted sterilisation method is used for a preparation that 
is not a simple aqueous or oily solution, for example, colloidal 
suspensions. 
6.5. Before any sterilisation process is adopted, its suitability for the product 
and its efficacy in achieving the desired sterilising conditions in all parts 
of each type of load to be processed shall be demonstrated by physical 
measurements and by biological indicators, where appropriate. The 
validity of the process shall be verified at scheduled intervals, at least 
annually, and whenever significant modifications have been made to the 
equipment. Records shall be kept of the results. 
6.6. For effective sterilisation the whole of the material shall be subjected to 
the required treatment and the process shall be designed to ensu re that it 
is achieved. 
6.7. Biological indicators shall be considered only as an additional method of 
monitoring the sterilisation process. They shall be stored and used 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions and their quality checked 
by positive controls. If they are used, strict precautions shall be taken to 
avoid any transfer of microbial contamination from them. 
6.8. There shall be a clear means of differentiating products that have not 
been sterilised from those which have. Each basket, tray, or other carrier 
of products or components shall be clearly labelled with the name of the 
material, its batch number and an indication of whether or not it has 
been sterilised. Indicators such as autoclave tape may be used where 
appropriate to indicate whether or not a batch (or sub -batch) has passed 
through a sterilisation process, but they do not give a reliable indication 
that the batch is in fact sterile. 
6.9. Validated loading patterns shall be established for all sterilisation 
processes. 
6.10. Sterilisation records shall be available for each sterilisation run. They 
shall be approved as part of the batch-release procedure. 
6.11.1. Terminal sterilisation- 
6.11.1.1. Each heat -sterilisation cycle shall be recorded by means of 
appropriate equipment of suitable accuracy and precision, e.g., 
on a time or temperature chart with a suitably large scale. The 
temperature shall be recorded by a probe situated at the 
coolest part of the load or loaded chamber, this point having 
been determined during the validation; the temperature shall 
preferably be checked against a second independent 
temperature probe located at the same position. Sterilisation 
records shall be available for each sterilisation run and shall be 
approved as part of the batch release procedure. Chemical or 
biological indicators may also be used but shall not take the 
place of physical controls. 
6.11.1.2. Sufficient time shall be allowed for the whole of the load to 
reach the required temperature before measurement of the 
sterilising time is started. This time shall be determined for 
each type of load to be processed. 
6.11.1.3. After the high -temperature phase of a heat sterilisation cycle, 
precautions shall be taken against contamination of a sterilised 
load during cooling. Any cooling fluid or gas in contact with 
the product shall be sterilised. 
6.11.1.4. Both t emperature and pressure shall be used to monitor the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
process. Control instrumentation shall normally be 
independent of monitoring instrumentation and recording 
charts. Where automated control and monitoring systems are 
used for these applications they shal l be validated to ensure 
that critical process requirements are met. System and cycle 
faults shall be registered by the system and observed by the 
operator. The reading of the independent temperature indicator 
shall be routinely checked against the reading on the chart 
recorder during the sterilisation period. For sterilisers fitted 
with a drain at the bottom of the chamber, it may also be 
necessary to record the temperature at this position throughout 
the sterilisation period. There shall be regular leak t ests on the 
chamber when a vacuum phase is part of the cycle. 
6.11.1.5. The items to be sterilised, other than products in sealed 
containers, shall be wrapped in a material that allows the 
removal of air and the penetration of steam but prevents 
recontamination afte r sterilisation. Specially designed 
autoclavable stainless steel containers, that allow steam to 
enter and air to leave, can also be used. All parts of the load 
shall be in contact with water or saturated steam at the 
required temperature for the required time. 
6.11.1.6. Care shall be taken to ensure that the steam used for 
sterilisation is of suitable quality chemical, microbiological 
and endotoxin analysis of condensate and physical 
examination of steam (such as dryness, superheat and non -
condensable gases) and doe s not contain additives at a level 
that could cause contamination of the product or equipment. 
Steam used for sterilisation shall be tested regularly. 
6.11.1.7. Sterilisation by dry heat may be suitable for non -aqueous 
liquids or dry-powder products. The process used shall include 
air circulation within the chamber and the maintenance of a 
positive pressure to prevent the entry of non-sterile air. If air is 
supplied it shall be passed through a microorganism -retaining 
filter (e.g., a HEPA filter). Where sterilization by dry heat is 
also intended to remove pyrogens, challenge tests using 
endotoxins are required as part of the validation. 
6.11.1.8. Sterilisation by radiation is used mainly for heat -sensitive 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
materials and products. Many pharmaceutical products and 
some packaging materials are radiation -sensitive, so this 
method is permissible only when the absence of deleterious 
effects on the product has been confirmed experimentally. 
Ultraviolet irradiation is not an acceptable method for terminal 
sterilisation. 
6.11.1.9. If sterilisation by radiation is done by an outside contractor, 
the manufacturer is responsible for ensuring that the 
requirements of paragraph 6.8 are met and that the 
sterilisation process is validated. 
6.11.1.10. During the sterilisation procedure the radiation dose shall be 
measured. The dosimeters used for this purpose shall be 
independent of the dose rate and shall provide a quantitative 
measurement of the dose received by the product itself. 
Dosimeters shall be inserted in the load in sufficient number 
and close enough togeth er to ensure that there is always a 
dosimeter in the chamber. Where plastic dosimeters are used 
they shall be used within the time -limit of their calibration. 
Dosimeter absorbance shall be read shortly after exposure to 
radiation. Radiation -sensitive colou r discs may be used to 
differentiate between packages that have been subjected to 
irradiation and those that have not; they are not indicators of 
successful sterilisation. The information obtained shall 
constitute part of the batch record. 
6.11.1.11. Validation procedures shall ensure that consideration is given 
to the effects of variations in the density of the packages. 
6.11.1.12. Material-handling procedures shall prevent any mix -up of 
irradiated and non -irradiated materials. Each package shall 
carry a radiation -sensitive indicator to show whether or not it 
has been subjected to radiation treatment. 
6.11.1.13. The total radiation dose shall be administered within a 
predetermined period. 
6.11.1.14. Sterilisation by gases and fumigants shall only be used for 
finished products where there is no suitable alternative. 
6.11.1.15. Various gases and fumigants may be used for sterilisation 
(e.g., ethylene oxide and hydrogen peroxide vapour). Ethylene 
oxide shall be used only when no other method is practicable. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
During process validation, it shall be shown that the gas has 
no damaging effect on the product and that the conditions and 
time allowed for degassing are to reduce any residual gas and 
reaction products to defined acceptable limits for the type of 
product or material concerned. These limits shall be 
incorporated in the specifications. 
6.11.1.16. Direct contact between gas and microorganisms is essential; 
precautions shall, therefore, be taken to avoid the presence of 
organisms likely to be enclosed in materials such as crystals or 
dried protein. The nature and quantity of p ackaging materials 
can significantly affect the process. 
6.11.1.17. Before exposure to the gas, materials shall be brought into 
equilibrium with the humidity and temperature required by the 
process. This requirement shall be balanced against the need 
to minimise the waiting time before sterilisation. 
6.11.1.18. Each sterilisation cycle shall be monitored with suitable 
biological indicators, using the appropriate number of test 
pieces distributed throughout the load. The information thus 
obtained shall form part of the batch record. 
6.11.1.19. Biological indicators shall be stored and used according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions and their performance checked by 
positive controls. 
6.11.1.20. For each sterilization cycle, records shall be made of the time 
taken to complete the cycle, of the pressure , temperature and 
humidity within the chamber during the process and of the gas 
concentration. The pressure and temperature shall be recorded 
on a chart throughout the cycle. The records shall form part of 
the batch record. 
6.11.1.21. After sterilisation, the load sh all be stored in a controlled 
manner in ventilated conditions to allow concentration of 
residual gas and reaction products to fall to their prescribed 
levels. This process shall be validated. 

6.11.2. Aseptic processing and sterilisation by filtration:- 
6.11.2.1. The objective of aseptic processing is to maintain the 
sterility of a product that is assembled from components, 
each of which has been sterilised by one of the above 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
methods. 
6.11.2.2. The operating conditions shall be to prevent microbial 
contamination. 
6.11.2.3. In order to maintain the sterility of the components and the 
product during aseptic processing, careful attention needs to 
be given to the following namely:- 
(a) the environment; 
(b) personnel; 
(c) critical surfaces; 
(d) container or closure sterilisation and transfer 
procedures; 
(e) the maximum holding period of the product before 
filling into the final container; and 
(f) the sterilising filter. 
6.11.2.4. Certain solutions and liquids that cannot be sterilised in the 
final container can be filtered through a sterile filte r of 
nominal pore size 0.22 µ (or less), or with at least equivalent 
microorganism-retaining properties, into a previously 
sterilised container. Such filters can remove bacteria and 
moulds, but not all viruses or mycoplasmas. Consideration 
shall be given t o complementing the filtration process with 
some degree of heat treatment. Filtration alone is not 
considered sufficient when sterilisation in the final container 
is possible. Of the methods currently available, steam 
sterilisation is preferred. 
6.11.2.5. Owing to t he potential additional risks of the filtration 
method as compared with other sterilisation processes, a 
double-filter layer or second filtration through a further 
sterilised microorganism-retaining filter immediately prior to 
filling may be advisable. The final sterile filtration shall be 
carried out as close as possible to the filling point. 
6.11.2.6. The fibre-shedding characteristics of filters shall be minimal 
(virtually zero). Asbestos-containing filters shall not be used 
under any circumstances. 
6.11.2.7. The integrity of the sterilised filter shall be verified before 
use and shall be confirmed immediately after use by an 
appropriate method such as a bubble point, diffusive flow or 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
pressure hold test. The time taken to filter a known volume 
of bulk solution and the pressure difference to be used across 
the filter shall be determined during validation and any 
significant difference from these during routine 
manufacturing shall be noted and investigated. Results of 
these checks shall be included in the batch record. The 
integrity of critical gas and air vent filters shall be confirmed 
after use. The integrity of other filters shall be confirmed at 
appropriate intervals. Consideration shall be given to 
increased monitoring of filter integrity in processes that 
involve harsh c onditions, e.g., the circulation of high -
temperature air. 
6.11.2.8. The same filter shall not be used for more than one working 
day unless such use has been validated. 
6.11.2.9. The filter shall not affect the product either by removing 
ingredients from it or by releasing substances into it. 

6.11.3. Isolator technology- 
6.11.3.1. The use of isolator technology to minimise human 
interventions in processing areas may result in a significant 
decrease in the risk of microbial contamination of 
aseptically manufactured products from the envi ronment. 
There are many possible designs of isolators and transfer 
devices. The isolator and the background environment shall 
be designed so that the required air quality for each zone can 
be realised. Isolators are constructed of various materials 
more or less prone to puncture and leakage. Transfer devices 
may vary from single -door to double -door designs to fully -
sealed systems incorporating sterilisation mechanisms. 
6.11.3.2. The transfer of materials into and out of the unit is one of 
the greatest potential sourc es of contamination. In general 
the area inside the isolator is the local zone for high -risk 
manipulations, although it is recognised that unidirectional 
airflow may not exist in the working zone of all isolators 
and transfer devices. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Explanation.- For the purpose of this paragraph “local 
zone” means an area inside the isolator for high risk 
manipulation. 

6.11.3.3. The air classification required for the background 
environment depends on the design of the isolator and its 
application. It shall be controlled, and fo r aseptic processing 
it shall be at least Grade D. 
6.11.3.4. Isolators shall be introduced only after appropriate 
validation. Validation shall take into account all critical 
factors of isolator technology, for example, the quality of the 
air inside and outside (back ground) the isolator, sanitisation 
of the isolator, the transfer process and isolator integrity. 
6.11.3.5. Monitoring shall be done routinely and shall include 
frequent leak testing of the isolator and the glove or sleeve 
system. 

6.11.4. Blow, Fill-Seal technology- 
6.11.4.1. Blow, Fill -Seal units are purpose -built machines in which, 
in one continuous operation, containers are formed from a 
thermoplastic granulate, filled and then sealed, all by the 
one automatic machine. Blow, Fill -Seal equipment used for 
aseptic production which is fitted with an effective Grade A 
air shower may be installed in at least a Grade C zone, 
provided that Grade A or B clothing is used. The 
environment shall comply with the viable and non -viable 
limits at rest and the viable limit only when in opera tion. 
Blow, Fill -Seal equipment used for the production of 
products which are terminally sterilised shall be installed in 
at least a Grade D zone. 
6.11.4.2. Because of this special technology, particular attention shall 
be paid to at least the following, namely:- 
(a) equipment design and qualification; 
(b) validation and reproducibility of cleaning -in-place and 
sterilisation-in-place; 
(c) background clean room environment in which the 
equipment is located; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(d) operator training and clothing; and 
(e) interventions in the critical zone of the equipment 
including any aseptic assembly prior to the 
commencement of filling. 

7. Personnel:- 
7.1. Only the minimum number of personnel required shall be present in 
clean areas; this is particularly important during aseptic processes. As 
far as possible, inspections and controls shall be conducted from 
outside such areas. 
7.2. All personnel (including those concerned with cleaning and 
maintenance) employed in such areas shall receive initial and regular 
training in disciplines relevant to the correct manufactu re of sterile 
products, including hygiene and the basic elements of microbiology. 
When outside staff who have not received such training (e.g., building 
or maintenance contractors) need to be brought in, particular care shall 
be taken over their instruction and supervision. 
7.3. Staff who have been engaged in the processing of animal -tissue 
materials or of cultures of microorganisms other than those used in the 
current manufacturing process shall not enter sterile -product areas 
unless rigorous and clearly define d decontamination procedures have 
been followed. 
7.4. High standards of personal hygiene and cleanliness are essential and 
personnel involved in the manufacture of sterile preparations shall be 
instructed to report any conditions that may cause the shedding of 
abnormal numbers or types of contaminants; periodic health checks for 
such conditions are desirable. The action to be taken in respect of 
personnel who might be introducing undue microbial hazards shall be 
decided by a designated competent person. 
7.5. Changing and washing shall follow a written procedure designed to 
minimise the contamination of clean -area clothing or the carry -through 
of contaminants to clean areas. The clothing and its quality shall be 
appropriate for the process and the grade of the working area. It shall be 
worn in such a way so as to protect the product from contamination. 
7.6. Outdoor clothing shall not be brought into changing rooms leading to 
Grade B and C rooms. For every worker in a Grade A or B area, clean 
sterile (sterilised or adequately sanitized) protective garments shall be 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
provided at each work session. Gloves shall be regularly disinfected 
during operations. Masks and gloves shall be changed at least every 
working session. Operators working in Grade A and B zone shall wear 
sanitised goggles. 
7.7. Wrist-watches, cosmetics and jewellery shall not be worn in clean 
areas. 
7.8. The clothing required for each grade is as follows: 
(i) Grade D: The hair and, where relevant, beard and moustache shall 
be covered. Protective clothing and appropriate shoes or overshoes 
shall be worn. Appropriate measures shall be taken to avoid any 
contamination from outside the clean area. 
(ii) Grade C: The hair and, where relevant, beard and moustache shall 
be covered. A one -piece jumpsuit, gathered at the wrists and with 
a high neck, and appropriate shoes or overshoes shall be worn. 
The clothing shall shed virtually no fibres or particulate matter. 
(iii) Grades A and B: Entry of personnel into Grade A zone shall be 
minimised. Headgear shall totally enclose the hair and, where 
relevant, beard and moustache. A one -piece jumpsuit, gathered at 
the wrists and with a high neck, shall be worn. The headgear shall 
be tucked into the neck of the suit. A facemask shall be worn to 
prevent the shedding of droplets. Sterilised, non -powdered gloves 
of appropriate material and sterilised or disinfected footwear shall 
be worn. Trouser bottoms shall be tucked inside the footwear and 
garment sleeves into the gloves. The protective clothing shall shed 
virtually no fibres or particulate matter and shall ret ain particles 
shed by the body. 
7.9. Clothing used in clean areas shall be laundered or cleaned in such a 
way that it does not gather additional particulate contaminants that can 
later be shed. Separate laundry facilities for such clothing are desirable. 
If fi bres are damaged by inappropriate cleaning or sterilisation, there 
may be an increased risk of shedding particles. Washing and 
sterilisation operations shall follow standard operating procedures. 

8. Premises: 
8.1. All premises shall as far as possible be designed to avoid the 
unnecessary entry of supervisory or control personnel. Grade A and B 
zone shall be designed so that all operations can be observed from 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
outside. 
8.2. In clean areas all exposed surfaces shall be smooth, impervious and 
unbroken to minimise the shed ding or accumulation of particles or 
microorganisms and to permit the repeated application of cleaning 
agents and disinfectants, where used. 
8.3. To reduce the accumulation of dust and to facilitate cleaning, there shall 
be no uncleanable recesses and a minimum of projecting ledges, 
shelves, cupboards and equipment. Doors shall be carefully designed to 
avoid uncleanable recesses; sliding doors may be undesirable for this 
reason. Swing doors shall open to the high pressure side and be 
provided with self -closers. Exceptions are permitted based on egress 
and site environmental, health and safety containment requirements. 
8.4. False ceilings shall be sealed to prevent contamination from the void 
space above them. 
8.5. Pipes and ducts and other utilities shall be installed so t hat they do not 
create recesses, unsealed openings and surfaces that are difficult to 
clean. Sanitary pipes and fittings shall be used and threaded pipe 
connections shall be avoided. 
8.6. Sinks and drains shall be avoided wherever possible and shall be 
excluded from Grade A and B zone where aseptic operations are carried 
out. Where installed they shall be designed, located and maintained so 
as to minimise the risks of microbial contamination; they shall be fitted 
with effective, easily cleanable traps and with a ir breaks to prevent 
backflow. Any floor channels shall be open and easily cleanable and be 
connected to drains outside the area in a manner that prevents the 
ingress of microbial contaminants. 
8.7. Changing rooms shall be designed as airlocks and used to provi de 
physical separation of the different stages of changing tominimise 
microbial and particulate contamination of protective clothing. They 
shall be flushed effectively with filtered air. The final stage of the 
changing room shall, in the at rest state, be the same Grade as the zone 
into which it leads. The use of separate changing rooms for entering and 
leaving clean areas is sometimes desirable. In general hand washing 
facilities shall be provided only in the first stage of the changing rooms. 
There shall not be a change of more than one Grade between airlocks or 
passages and changing rooms, i.e., a Grade D passage can lead to a 
Grade C airlock, which leads to a Grade B changing room, which leads 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
to a Grade B clean room. Changing rooms shall be of a sufficient size to 
allow for ease of changing. Changing rooms shall be equipped with 
mirrors so that personnel can confirm the correct fit of garments before 
leaving the changing room. 
8.8. Airlock doors shall not be opened simultaneously. An interlocking 
system and a visual or audible or both warning system shall be operated 
to prevent the opening of more than one door at a time. 
8.9. A filtered air supply shall be used to maintain a positive pressure and 
the airflow relative to surrounding areas of a lower Grade under all 
operational conditions; it shall flush the area effectively. Adjacent 
rooms of different Grades shall have a pressure differential of 
approximately 10 to 15 Pascal (guidance value). Particular attention 
shall be paid to the protection of the zone of great est risk, i.e., the 
immediate environment to which the product and the cleaned 
components in contact with it are exposed. The recommendations 
regarding air supplies and pressure differentials may need to be 
modified where it becomes necessary to contain ce rtain materials, e.g. 
pathogenic, highly toxic, radioactive or live viral or bacterial materials 
or products. The decontamination of the facilities and the treatment of 
air leaving a clean area may be necessary for some operations. 
8.10. It shall be demonstrated that airflow patterns do not present a 
contamination risk; for example, care shall be taken to ensure that 
particles from a particle generating person, operation or machine are not 
conveyed to a zone of higher product risk. 
8.11. A warning system shall be opera ted to indicate failure in the air 
supply. Indicators of pressure differentials shall be fitted between areas 
where this difference is important, and the pressure differentials shall be 
regularly recorded and failure alarmed. 
8.12. Consideration shall be given t o restricting unnecessary access to 
critical filling areas e.g., Grade A filling zones, by means of a physical 
barrier. 

9. Equipment: 
9.1. A conveyor belt shall not pass through a partition between a Grade A or 
B clean area and a processing area of lower air clea nliness, unless the 
belt itself is continuously sterilised (e.g., in a sterilising tunnel). 
9.2. Whenever possible, equipment used for processing sterile products 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
shall be chosen so that it can be effectively sterilised by steam or dry 
heat or other methods. 
9.3. As far as possible, equipment fittings and services shall be designed and 
installed so that operations, maintenance and repairs can be carried out 
outside the clean area. Equipment that has to be taken apart for 
maintenance shall be re -sterilised after compl ete reassembly, wherever 
possible. 
9.4. When equipment maintenance is carried out within a clean area, clean 
instruments and tools shall be used and the area shall be cleaned and 
disinfected again, where appropriate, before processing recommences, 
if the required standards of cleanliness or asepsis or both have not been 
maintained during the maintenance work. 
9.5. All equipment such as sterilisers, air-handling and filtration systems, air 
vent and gas filters, water treatment, generation, storage and 
distribution sys tems shall be subject to validation and planned 
maintenance; their return to use shall be approved. 
9.6. Water-treatment plants and distribution systems shall be designed, 
constructed and maintained so as to ensure a reliable source of water of 
an appropriate q uality. They shall not be operated beyond their 
designed capacity. Consideration shall be given to include a testing 
programme in the maintenance of a water system. Water for injection 
shall be produced, stored and distributed in a manner which prevents 
the growth of microorganisms, e.g., by constant circulation at a 
temperature above 70 °C or not more than 4 °C. 

10. Finishing of sterile products:- 
10.1. Containers shall be closed by appropriately validated methods. 
Containers closed by fusion, e.g., glass or plasti c ampoules, shall be 
subject to 100 percent integrity testing. Samples of other containers 
shall be checked for integrity according to appropriate procedures. 
10.2. The container closure system for aseptically filled vials is not fully 
integral until the alumin ium cap has been crimped into place on the 
stoppered vial. Crimping of the cap shall, therefore, be performed as 
soon as possible after stopper insertion. 
10.3. As the equipment used to crimp vial caps can generate large 
quantities of non-viable particulates, the equipment shall be located at a 
separate station equipped with adequate air extraction. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
10.4. Vial capping can be undertaken as an aseptic process using 
sterilised caps or as a clean process outside the aseptic core. Where this 
latter approach is adopted, vi als shall be protected by Grade A 
conditions up to the point of leaving the aseptic processing area, and 
thereafter stoppered vials shall be protected with a Grade A air supply 
until the cap has been crimped. 
10.5. Vials with missing or displaced stoppers shall be rejected prior to 
capping. Where human intervention is required at the capping station, 
appropriate technology shall be used to prevent direct contact with the 
vials and to minimise microbial contamination. 
10.6. Restricted access barriers and isolators may be beneficial in 
assuring the required conditions and minimising direct human 
interventions into the capping operation. 
10.7. Containers sealed under vacuum shall be tested for maintenance of 
that vacuum after an appropriate, predetermined period. 
10.8. Filled cont ainers of parenteral products shall be inspected 
individually for extraneous contamination or other defects. When 
inspection is carried out visually this shall be done under suitable and 
controlled conditions of illumination and background. Operators doing 
the inspection shall pass regular eyesight checks, using personal 
corrective lenses (e.g., spectacles or contact lenses) as required, and be 
allowed frequent breaks from inspection. Where other methods of 
inspection are used, the process shall be validate d and the performance 
of the equipment shall be checked at intervals. Results shall be 
recorded. 

PART III 
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURING OF 
PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTS CONTAINING HAZARDOUS 
SUBSTANCES SUCH AS SEX HORMONES, STEROIDS (ANABOLIC, 
ANDROGENIC) OR CYTOTOXIC SUBSTANCES 

Note.-Good Manufacturing Practices for pharmaceutical products: 
Main principles as given in Part I Schedule shall be complied with, 
mutatis mutandis, for the manufacture of hazardous substances such as 
certain sex hormones, ste roids (anabolic, androgenic) or cytotoxic 
substances. In addition to these requirements, the following specific 
requirements shall also be followed, namely:— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1. Introduction:- 
The areas to which this Part applies include all zones where the handling of 
products could lead to cross -contamination, exposure of personnel, or 
discharge to the environment. Wherever possible products shall be 
manufactured in closed systems. 
1.1. Facilities shall be designed and operated in accordance with the main 
good manufacturing practices principles, as follows:- 
(a) to ensure quality of product; 
(b) to protect the operators from possible harmful effects of products 
containing hazardous substances; and 
(c) to protect the environment from contamination and thereby protect 
the public from possible harmful effects of products containing 
hazardous substances. 
1.2. The production of certain products containing hazardous substances shall 
generally be conducted in separate, dedicated, self -contained facilities. 
These self -contained facilities may be in the s ame building as another 
facility but shall be separated by a physical barrier and have e.g., 
separate entrances, staff facilities and air-handling systems. The extent of 
the separation from adjacent facilities and sharing of common services 
shall be determined by risk assessment. 
1.3. In general these manufacturing facilities shall be regarded as containment 
facilities. 
1.4. The effective operation of a facility may require the combination of some 
or all of the following, namely:- 
(a) appropriate facility design and layo ut, with the emphasis on safely 
containing the materials being handled. Manufacturing processes 
using closed systems or barrier technol ogy enhance operator and 
product protection; 
(b) manufacturing process controls including adherence to SOPs; 
(c) appropriately designed Environmental Controls Systems (ECS) or 
HVAC; 
(d) extraction systems; 
(e) Personal Protective Equipment (PPE); 
(f) appropriate d e-gowning and decontamination 
procedures; 
(g) industrial hygiene (monitoring staff exposure levels); 
(h) medical su rveillance (monitoring sta ff exposure l evels); 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
and 
(i) administrative controls. 

2. Risk assessment:- 
2.1. Not all products containing hazardous substances are equally potent and 
risk assessments shall be carried out to determine the potential hazards 
to operators and to the environment. The risk assessment shall also 
determine which phase of the product production and control cycles, 
from manufacture of the API to distribution of the ﬁnished product, 
would fall under the requirements of these guidelines. Risk assessments 
applicable to the en vironment shall include airborne contamination as 
well as liquid efﬂuent contamination. 
2.2. Assuming that the risk assessment determines that the products or 
materials being handled pose a risk to the operators or to the public or to 
the environment, the guide lines to be followed for the design and 
operation of the facility shall be as detailed in this Schedule. 
2.3. The toxicological data available, such as permissible occupational 
exposure levels (OEL) for the product, shall be taken into account when 
conducting the risk assessment. 
2.4. The risk assessment shall ta ke into account occupational health and 
safety requirements for OELs in the work environment. 

3. Product protection:- The requirement for producing quality products, with 
respect to protection from contaminatio n and cross -contamination, clean 
room class of ai r, temperature and humidity shall be as for other 
pharmaceutical products. 

4. Personal Protection Equipment and breathing air systems:- 
4.1. The fundamental design principle for a facility and its production 
equipment is to pr ovide product containment and operator protection. In 
case of the facility and equipment design is not pr oviding adequate 
product containment, operator protection shall be provided. If facility and 
equipment design are adequate, a spillage or n on-routine incident could 
cause a hazardous situation, in which case PPE shall be available. Unless 
otherwise speciﬁed in the material safety data sheet, operators shall be 
protected from exposure with an appropriate method, such as by wearing- 
(a) ﬂash-spun, high-density po lyethylene ﬁbre material suits or 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
impervious washable protective suits. Integral hoods may be required 
depending on the respirator type used; 
(b) ﬂash-spun, high-density polyethylene ﬁbre material shoes, l ower leg 
covers or cleanable boots; 
(c) suitable single -use, disposa ble gl oves. Dou ble gl oves shall be worn 
where direct act ive contact with the product cannot be avoided. 
Gloves shall be taped or sealed on to the protective suit sleeves; and 
(d) respirator eye and face protection with associated breath ing air 
systems. 
4.2. Where breathing air systems are use d, these shall be pr ovided to supp ly 
safe breathing air to the operators to pr event them from inhaling air from 
within the facility. Personnel shall be appropriate ly trained and assessed 
in the use of the se systems before th ey enter the area. The breathing air 
systems shall comprise a protect ive face mask, which shall fo rm an 
integral part of a protect ive suit. The breathing air systems could be a ny 
of the systems described below- 
(a) a central air supply system which connects to the operator ’s facemask 
by means of ﬂ exible hoses and quick coupling soc kets, also called an 
Airline Respirator (AR). The air connection shall inco rporate a one -
way air system to pr event contaminated air entering the face mask 
during connection or disconnection. The air supp ly shall be treated to 
ensure a temperature and l evel of humidity that are comfo rtable for 
the operato r. The air source could be a high pressure fan or an air 
compressor. If an air compressor is used, it shall be of the oil-free type 
or have suitable oil removal ﬁlters ﬁtted; 
(b) a Self -Contained Breathing Apparatus (SC BA) or P owered Air 
Purifying Respirator (PAPR) that is securely attached to the operator’s 
belt and connects to the operator ’s face mask. This system dr aws air 
from the room in which the operator is working and the air supp ly is 
delivered to the face mask by means of a batte ry-driven fan. The AR 
provides superior protection to the PAPR apparatus; 
(c) for zones with l ower contamination l evels, a half -mask High 
Efﬁciency Particulate Air ﬁlter (HE PA) ca rtridge respirator of N95 -
type paper ﬁlter mask may be acceptable. 
4.3. The selection of the respirator type is based on the relationship between 
the accepted OEL and the respirator-certiﬁed Protection Factor (PF). 
4.4. The air supplies shall be ﬁltered through a ﬁnal ﬁlte r, which shall be a 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
HEPA ﬁlter rated as an H13 ﬁlter according to European norms. The 
supply of breathing air in to the face mask or protective suit or both shall 
result in the interior of the mask and suit being at a positive pressure 
relative to the facility environment. 
4.5. Central breathing air supply systems shall have a one hundred percent 
back-up system in the event of the main system failing. This could be in 
the form of a gas bottle system with atleast five minutes supp ly. Change 
over from the no rmal supply to the back -up supp ly shall be automatic. 
The system shall h ave a monitoring system and send ala rm signals to a 
permanently manned location in the following situations, namely:- 
(i) failure of main air supply; 
(ii) temperature out of speciﬁcation (OOS); 
(iii) humidity OOS; 
(iv) carbon dioxide (CO2) OOS; 
(v) carbon monoxide (CO) OOS; and 
(vi) sulfur dioxide (SO2) OOS. 
4.6. Breathing air shall be ﬁltered by means of pre -ﬁlters, coalescing ﬁlters 
and ﬁnal ﬁlters to have the minimum air quality speciﬁcations of ISO 
standards and European norms. 
4.7. Where air is delivered through a central system the piping shall not cause 
any contamination to be liberated into the air stream. Stainless steel 
piping is preferred. The ﬁnal ﬁlters shall be as close as p ossible to the 
operator connection points. The operator hose connection to the air 
supply shall be a dedicated connection speciﬁc to the breathing air 
system to avoid inadvertent connection to a different gas system. 

5. Environmental protection:- 
5.1. Due to the hazardous nature of the products being handled in the facility, 
neither the product nor its residues shall be allowed to escape into the 
atmosphere or to be discharged directly to normal drainage systems. 
5.2. The external atmosphere and the public in the vicinity of the facility shall 
be protected from possible harm from hazardous substances. 
5.3. If liquid efﬂuent poses a safety or contamination risk, the efﬂuent shall be 
treated before being discharged to a municipal drain. 
5.4. Exhaust air ﬁltration to ensure environmental protection shall be as per 
paragraph 11. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6. Facility layout:- 
6.1. The premises shall be designed and constructed to prevent the ingress or 
egress of contaminants. In drawing up the facility design, attention shall 
be paid to the level of containment provided by the equipment. 
6.2. The link between the interior and exterior of the premises shall be 
through airlocks [Personnel Airlock (PAL), Material Airlock (MAL)], 
changing rooms, pass boxes, pass -through hatches, decontamination 
devices, etc. These entry and exit doors for materials and personnel shall 
have an interlock mechanism or other approp riate system to prevent the 
opening of more than one door at a time. 
6.3. The changing rooms shall have an arrangement with a step -over- bench. 
The facilities on the exit side shall incorporate showers for the 
operators. 
6.4. The premises shall be laid out and designed so as to facilitate the required 
pressure cascades and containment. 
6.5. The premises and equipment shall be appropriately designed and 
installed to facilitate cleaning and decontamination. 
6.6. The manufacturing site a nd buildings shall be described in sufﬁcient 
detail by means of plans and written explanations to ensure that the 
designation and conditions of use of all the rooms are correctly shown. 
6.7. The ﬂow of people and products shall be clearly marked on the layouts 
and plans. 
6.8. The activities carried out in the vicinity of the site shall be indicated. 
6.9. Plans shall describe the ventilation systems, indicating inlets and outlets, 
in relation to other facility air inlet and outlet points. 
6.10. The facility shall be a well -sealed structure with no air leakage through 
ceilings, cracks or service areas. 
6.11. Areas of the facility where exposed product presents a risk shall be 
maintained at a negative air pressure relative to the environment. 

7. Air-handling systems:- 
7.1. The HVAC system shall be appropriately designed, installed and 
maintained to ensure protection of product, personnel and the 
environment. 
7.2. Facilities and premises dealing with hazardous substances shall have the 
following basic air-handling characteristics, namely:- 
(i) there shall be no direct venting of air to the outside; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(ii) air-conditioning or ventilation shall result in a negative pressure 
relative to the outside. Air pressure differentials shall be such that 
there is no uncontrolled ﬂow of air between the work area and the 
external environment; 
(iii) appropriate air pressure alarm systems shall be provided to warn of 
any pressure cascade reversal or loss of design pressure status. The 
appropriate design, alert and action limits shall be in place. System 
redundancies shall be in place to respond appropriately to pressure 
cascade failure; 
(iv) the starting and stopping of the supply and exhaust air fan shall be 
synchronized so that the premises remain at a negative pressure 
during start-up and shut-down; 
(v) the air pressure cascade within the facility, shall comply with 
normal pharmaceutical pressure cascade requirements with regards 
to product protection, dust containment and personnel protection; 
(vi) visual indication of the status of room pressures shall be provided in 
each room; 
(vii) air shall be exhausted to the outside through HEPA ﬁlters and not be 
re-circulated except to the same area, and provided that a further 
HEPA ﬁltration stage is applied to the return air. Where HEPA 
ﬁlters are mentioned in the Schedule, this refers to HEPA ﬁlters 
with a minimum rating of H13 according to European norms; 
(viii) where possible, single -pass air -handling systems with no 
recirculation shall be provided; 
(ix) exhaust air or return air shall be ﬁltered through a safe -change or 
bag- in-bag-out ﬁlter housing. The ﬁlter housing shall contain pre -
ﬁlters and HEPA ﬁlters, both of which shall be removable with the 
safe bagging system; 
(x) changing rooms shall be supplied with air ﬁltered to the same 
standard as that for the work area they serve; 
(xi) airlocks, pass-through hatches, etc., shall have supply and extract air 
to provide the nece ssary air pressure cascade and containment. The 
ﬁnal, or containment perimeter, airlock or pass -through hatch 
bordering on an external or non -good manufacturing practices area 
shall be at a positive pressure relative to the environment, to prevent 
the ingress of contaminants to the facility; 
(xii) if the facility provides insufficient containment, and operators’ 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
garments are contaminated with dust, the operators leaving the 
containment area shall pass through a decontamination system e.g., 
air showers or a mist s hower system, to assist with removing or 
controlling dust particles on their garments. Operators shall follow 
this route before de -gowning to use the ablutions or canteen 
facilities. All garments leaving the facility for laundering shall be 
safely bagged. Appropriate means for protecting laundry staff and 
prevention of contamination of other garments from non -hazardous 
facilities shall be in place. 
7.3. If required, appropriate measures shall be taken to prevent airﬂow from 
the primary packing area (through the conveyor “mouse hole”) to the 
secondary packing area. 
Note.- This could be overcome by having a pass-through chamber over 
the “mouse hole” which is maintained at a negative pressure to both 
primary and secondary packing. This typical arrangement is illustrated in 
Figure below. This principle can be applied to other situations where 
containment from two sides is required. The typical airflow pattern for 
contaminant shall be as specified in the figure below– 

7.4. Where possible, HEPA ﬁlters in the supply air system shall be terminally 
mounted to provide protection against back -ﬂow cross-contamination in 
the event of failure in the supply airﬂow. 
7.5. In some cases consideration can be given to the use of biosafety cabinets, 
isolation systems or glove boxes as a means for containment and 
operator protection. 

•🠖 •🠖 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
7.6. There shall be a system description including schematic drawings 
detailing the ﬁlters and their speciﬁcations, the number of air changes 
per hour, pressure gradients, clean room classes and related 
speciﬁcations. These shall be available for inspection. 
7.7. There shall be an indication of pressure gradients that are monitored by 
means of digital or analogue pressure indicators. 
7.8. Consideration shall be given to providing an emergency power supply, 
e.g., diesel generators, to ensure that safe operation of the premises and 
systems can be maintained at all times. 
7.9. The principles of airﬂow direction, air ﬁltration standards, temperature, 
humidity and related parameters shall be en sured and the ﬁltration shall 
be consistent with the zone concepts and product protection required. 
8. Air-Handling Units (AHU):- 
8.1. The decision to use return air or re -circulated air shall be made on the 
basis of a risk assessment. 
8.2. Where a full fresh -air or si ngle-pass system is used, an energy recovery 
wheel could be considered. In such cases, there shall not be any potential 
for air leakage between the supply air and exhaust air as it passes through 
the wheel. The relative pressures between supply and exhaust air systems 
shall be such that the exhaust-air system operates at a lower pressure than 
the supply system. (Alternatives to the energy recovery wheel, such as 
crossover plate heat exchangers, heat pipes and water coil heat 
exchangers, may be used.) 
8.3. Risk management principles shall be applied to address the potential of 
cross-contamination where energy wheels are used. 
8.4. If return air is to be re -circulated it shall pass through a safe change 
ﬁltration system before being introduced back into the supply AHU. The 
return air fan could form part of the AHU; however, the safe change ﬁlter 
shall be a dedicated unit. With this arrangement the return air passes 
through two sets of HEPA ﬁlters in series, i.e., the return air ﬁlters in the 
safe change housing and the s upply air HEPA ﬁlters. The supply air 
HEPA ﬁlters could either be located in the AHU or terminally located at 
the supply diffusers, depending on the clean room classiﬁcation of the 
facility. 
8.5. The starting and stopping of the supply and exhaust air fans and 
associated system ventilation fans shall be synchronised such that the 
premises retain their design pressure and ﬂow relationships during start -

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
up and shut -down. Processing shall stop when the fans are not running. 
This fan interlock sequence shall also apply if any fan shall fail, to ensure 
that there is no airﬂow reversal in the system. 

9. Safe change ﬁlter housings:- 
9.1. Safe change or bag -in-bag-out ﬁlter housings shall be suitably designed 
to provide operator protection and to prevent dust from the ﬁlters 
entering the atmosphere when ﬁlters are changed. The Sa fe change ﬁlter 
bypass arrangement shall be as specified in the figure below– 

9.2. The ﬁnal ﬁlters on the safe change unit shall be HEPA ﬁlters with at least 
an H13 classiﬁcation according to European norms ﬁlter standards. For 
dusty return, air pre-ﬁltration may also be required to prolong the life of 
the HEPA ﬁlters. The pre -ﬁltration ﬁlters shall also be removable 
through the bag-in-bag-out method. 

9.3. For e xhaust systems where the discharge contaminant is considered 
particularly hazardous, two banks of HEPA ﬁlters in series shall be 
considered to provide additional protection the ﬁrst ﬁlter fail. 
DOP 
Injection 
Filterintegrity test &De-contamination by-pass duct 
E 
Shut-
offDamper
s 
VFD 
Shut-
offDampe
r 
EXHAUSTAI
RFAN 
M M M 
SECONDARYFI
LTER 
VFD=VelocitySensor 
V=Variable FrequencyDrive 
M= Filter 
PressureDifferensialGua
ge 
V 
M M M HEPAFIL
TER 
HEPABag-
In,Bag-OutUnits 
•🠖 •🠖 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
9.4. All ﬁlter banks shall be provided with pressure differential i ndication 
gauges to indicate the ﬁlter dust loading and remaining lifespan of the 
ﬁlters. Connection to these gauges shall be copper or stainless steel and 
not plastic tubing, which could perish causing a contamination hazard. 
The tube connections on the ﬁ lter casing shall be provided with 
stopcocks, for safe removal or calibration of gauges. 
9.5. Monitoring of ﬁlters shall be done at regular intervals to prevent 
excessive ﬁlter loading that could force dust particles through the ﬁlter 
media, or could cause the ﬁlters to burst, resulting in ambient 
contamination. 
9.6. Computer based data monitoring systems may be installed to monitor 
ﬁlter condition. 
9.7. Filter pressure gauges shall be marked with the clean ﬁlter resistance and 
the change-out ﬁlter resistance. 
9.8. Installed ﬁlter leakage tests shall be performed in accordance with ISO 
standards. Injection ports (upstream) and access ports (downstream) 
shall, therefore, be provided for this purpose. 
9.9. The exhaust air fan on a safe change ﬁlter system shall be located after 
the ﬁlters so that the ﬁlter housing is maintained at a negative pressure. 
This poses a difﬁculty when carrying out ﬁlter integrity tests and for this 
reason a bypass damper system shall be provided, as illustrated in figure 
at paragraph 9.1, so that air can be circulated through the HEPA ﬁlters, 
while the scanning ports are open. Alternatively, an independent booster 
fan system can be used, with appropriate shut-off dampers. 
9.10. The bypass arrangement as shown in figure at paragraph 9.1also permits 
decontamination o f the ﬁlters by means of circulation of a sanitising 
agent. 
9.11. All exhaust systems from the facility, including dust extraction systems, 
vacuum system exhaust, ﬂuid bed drier exhaust and coating pan exhaust, 
shall be passed through safe change ﬁlter housings before being 
exhausted to the atmosphere. 
9.12. All exhaust points outside the building shall be located as far as possible 
from air entry points and exit points shall be at a high level to minimise 
the possibility of re -entrainment of exhaust air. Dominant and seasonal 
wind directions shall be taken into account when positioning exhaust 
and supply points. 
9.13. Where excessively dust -laden air is handled, a dust collector or bag 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
house shall be considered with the dust collector being located in an 
enclosed room mainta ined at a negative pressure. Access control, 
maintenance staff, PPE and breathing air systems shall then be provided 
to protect the operators during removal of dust from the collector bins. 
9.14. Portable vacuum cleaners and portable dust collectors shall be ﬁtt ed with 
H13 HEPA ﬁlters. These types of units shall be emptied and cleaned in a 
room which is under negative pressure relative to the environment. 
Personnel shall be provided with suitable PPE. 
9.15. Records of the safe disposal of all contaminated ﬁlters and du st shall be 
kept. 

10. Personnel decontamination systems:- 
10.1. If required, a means of preventing contaminants from leaving the 
facility on the garments of personnel shall be provided. This could be in 
the form of an air shower; mist shower, water shower or approp riate 
device. 
10.2. An air shower comprises an airlock where high velocity air is supplied 
through air nozzles (e.g., from the sides of the airlock) in order to 
dislodge dust particles. Air extraction grilles (e.g., at low level) shall 
draw the air away and retu rn it to the ﬁltration system. Some air 
showers may also incorporate a vertical unidirectional airﬂow section at 
the exit end, to ﬂush contaminants away. 

Note.- When air showers are used these shall be correctly designed to 
effectively extract dust. Air ﬁ ltration of the supply air and return or 
exhaust air shall comply with the same ﬁltration standards as used in 
the manufacturing facility. Normally the fan shall be activated by 
opening the door as the operator enters the shower, with a timing 
device on th e exit door interlock to allow sufﬁcient time for the 
decontamination process to be effective. 
10.3. Flushing devices similar to air or mist showers for personnel could be 
used at material exits to assist with removing contaminants. 
10.4. Wet mist or fog decontaminati on systems for operators can be 
employed for deactivating contaminants on the operators’ garments or 
causing contaminants to adhere to the garments so that they are not 
easily liberated. 
10.5. Personnel shall change into clean garments after having taken a shower. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 

11. Effluent treatment:- 
11.1. Liquid and solid waste efﬂuent shall be handled in such a manner as 
not to present a risk of contamination to the product, personnel or to the 
environment. 
11.2. All effluent shall be disposed of in a safe manner and the means of 
disposal shall be documented. Wh ere external contractors are used for 
efﬂuent disposal they shall have certiﬁcation authorising them to 
handle and treat hazardous products. 

12. Maintenance:- The efﬁcient and safe operation of a facility handling 
hazardous materials is reliant on regular mai ntenance being carried out, to 
ensure that all parameters remain within speciﬁed tolerances. 

13. Qualiﬁcation and validation:- 
System qualiﬁcation and validation shall be carried out. 

PART IV 

SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF 
BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS 
Note.—Good Manufacturing Practices for pharmaceutical products: main 
principles as given in Part I shall be complied with, mutatis mutandis, for 
the manufacture of Biological products. In addition to these requirements, 
the following specific requirements shall also be followed, namely:— 
1. Principles and general considerations:- 
1.1. Biological products can be defined according to their source material 
and method of manufacture. The source materials and methods 
employed in the manufacture of biological products for h uman use 
therefore represent critical factors in shaping their appropriate 
regulatory control. Biological products are derived from cells, tissues 
or microorganisms and reflect the inherent variability characteristic of 
living materials. The active substan ces in biological products are often 
too complex to be fully characterised by utilising physicochemical 
testing methods alone and may show a marked heterogeneity from one 
preparation or batch or both. Consequently, special considerations are 
needed when ma nufacturing biological products in order to maintain 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
consistency in product quality. 
1.2. The guidance provided in this Part applies to the manufacture, control 
and testing of biological products for human use from starting 
materials and preparations (incl uding seed lots, cell banks and 
intermediates) to the finished product. 
1.3. Manufacturing procedures within the scope of this Schedule includes- 
(a) growth of strains of microorganisms and eukaryotic cells; 
(b) extraction of substances from biological tissues, includi ng human, 
animal and plant tissues, and fungi; 
(c) recombinant DNA (rDNA) techniques; 
(d) hybridoma techniques; and 
(e) propagation of microorganisms in embryos or animals. 
1.4. Medicinal products of biological origin manufactured by these 
procedures include allergens, antigens, vaccines, certain hormones, 
cytokines, monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), enzymes, animal immune 
sera, products of fermentation (including products derived from 
rDNA), biological diagnostic reagents for in -vivo use and Advanced 
Therapy Medicinal Prod ucts (ATMPs) used for example in gene 
therapy and cell therapy. 
1.5. The manufacture, control and administration of biological active 
substances and finished products require certain specific considerations 
and precautions arising from the nature of these produ cts and their 
processes. Unlike conventional pharmaceutical products which are 
manufactured using chemical and physical techniques capable of a high 
degree of consistency, the manufacture of biological active substances 
and finished products involves biological processes and materials, such 
as cultivation of cells or extraction from living organisms. As these 
biological processes may display inherent variability, the range and 
nature of by -products may also be variable. As a result, QRM 
principles are particularly important for this class of materials and shall 
be used to develop the control strategy across all stages of manufacture 
so as to minimise variability and reduce the opportunity for 
contamination and cross-contamination. 
1.6. Materials and processing co nditions used in cultivation processes are 
designed to provide conditions for the growth of target cells and 
microorganisms. Therefore, extraneous microbial contaminants have 
the opportunity to grow. Furthermore, many biological products have 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
limited ability to withstand certain purification techniques, particularly 
those designed to inactivate or remove adventitious viral contaminants. 
The design of the processes, equipment, facilities, utilities, the 
conditions of preparation and addition of buffers and r eagents, 
sampling and training of the operators are key considerations in 
minimising such contamination events. Manufacturing shall be 
consistent with other specifications set out in the product summary 
files, marketing authorisation or clinical trial appr ovals [for example, 
number of generations (expressed as doublings or passages) between 
the seed lot or cell bank and the finished product]. 
1.7. Many biological materials (such as live-attenuated bacteria and viruses) 
cannot be terminally sterilised by heat, ga s or radiation. In addition, 
some products, such as certain live and adjuvant vaccines [for example, 
Bacilli Calmette Guerin (BCG) or Cholera], may not be sterilised by 
filtration processes. For these axenic products, processing shall be 
conducted aseptica lly to minimise the introduction of contaminants 
from the point where a potential contamination cannot be removed 
from the manufacturing process. The validation of specific and critical 
manufacturing steps such as virus removal or inactivation shall be 
carried out. Robust environmental controls and monitoring and, 
wherever feasible, in situ cleaning and sterilisation systems, together 
with the use of closed systems can significantly reduce the risk of 
accidental contamination and cross-contamination. 
1.8. Control usually involves biological analytical techniques, which 
typically have a greater variability than physicochemical 
determinations. The combination of variability in starting materials and 
the potential for subtle changes during the manufacturing process of 
biological products also requires an emphasis on production 
consistency. This is of particular concern because of the need to link 
consistency to original clinical trials documenting the product’s safety 
and efficacy. A robust manufacturing process is t herefore crucial and 
in-process controls take on a particular importance in the manufacture 
of biological active substances and medicinal products. 
1.9. Because of the risks inherent in producing and manipulating pathogenic 
and transmissible microorganisms duri ng the production and testing of 
biological materials, GMP shall prioritise the safety of the recipient to 
whom the biological product is administered, the safety of personnel 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
during operation and the protection of the environment. 
1.10 Biosafety considerations shall follow the guidelines issued by the 
Central Government in this regard. In the context of manufacturing 
pathogenic biological products of Biosafety Risk Group 3 and 4, close 
collaboration between such institutions is especially required to assu re 
that both product contamination and environmental contamination 
levels are controlled within the acceptable limits. 
2. Pharmaceutical quality system and quality risk management:- 
2.1. Biological products, like any pharmaceutical product, shall be 
manufactured in accordance with the requirements of a pharmaceutical 
quality system (product quality system) based on a life -cycle approach, 
good manufacturing practices for pharmaceutical products. Main 
principles- This approach facilitates innovation and continual 
improvement and also strengthens the link between pharmaceutical 
development and manufacturing activities. 
2.2. QRM principles shall be used to develop the control strategy across all 
manufacturing and control stages including materials sourcing and 
storage, pers onnel and materials flow, manufacture and packaging, 
quality control, quality assurance, storage and distribution activities, as 
described in this Part. Due to the inherent variability of biological 
processes and starting materials, ongoing trend analysis and periodic 
review are particularly important elements of product quality system. 
Thus, special attention shall be paid to starting material controls, 
change control, trend analysis and deviation management in order to 
ensure production consistency. Monit oring systems shall be designed 
so as to provide early detection of any unwanted or unanticipated 
factors that may affect the quality, safety and efficacy of the product. 
The effectiveness of the control strategy in monitoring, reducing and 
managing such r isks shall be regularly reviewed and the systems 
updated as required taking into account scientific and technical 
progress. 

3. Personnel:- 
3.1. Personnel responsible for production and control shall have an 
adequate background in relevant scientific disciplines s uch as 
microbiology, biology, biometry, chemistry, medicine, pharmacy, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
pharmacology, virology, immunology, biotechnology and veterinary 
medicine, together with sufficient practical experience to enable them 
to perform their duties. 
3.2. The health status of per sonnel shall be taken into consideration as part 
of ensuring product safety. Where necessary, personnel engaged in 
production, maintenance, testing and animal care (and inspections) 
shall be vaccinated with appropriate specific vaccines and have regular 
health checks. Any changes in the health status of personnel which 
could adversely affect the quality of the product shall preclude their 
working in the production area, and appropriate records kept. The 
scope and frequency of health monitoring shall be comm ensurate with 
the risk to the product and personnel. 
3.3. Training in cleaning and disinfection procedures, hygiene and 
microbiology shall emphasise the risk of microbial and adventitious 
contamination and the nature of the target microorganisms and growth 
media routinely used. 
3.4. Where required to minimise the opportunity for cross -contamination, 
restrictions on the movement of all personnel (including quality 
control, maintenance and cleaning staff) shall be defined on the basis 
of quality risk management princip les. In general, all personnel 
including those not routinely involved in the production operation 
(such as management, engineering staff and validation staff or 
auditors) shall not pass from areas with exposure to live 
microorganisms, genetically modified microorganisms, animal tissue, 
toxins, venoms or animals, to areas where other products (inactivated 
or sterile) or different organisms are handled. If such passage is 
unavoidable during a working day, then contamination control 
measures (for example, clearly defined decontamination measures such 
as a complete change of appropriate clothing and shoes and showering, 
if applicable) shall be followed by all personnel visiting any such 
production area unless otherwise justified on the basis of QRM. 
3.5. Because the risks are difficult to manage, personnel working in an 
animal facility shall be restricted from entering production areas where 
potential risks of cross-contamination exist. 
3.6. Staff assigned to the production of Bacille Calmette -Guerin (BCG) 
products shall not work with other infectious agents. In particular, they 
shall not work with virulent strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, nor 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
shall they be exposed to a known risk of tuberculosis infection. 
Additionally, they shall be carefully monitored with regular health 
checks that screen for tuberculosis infection. 
3.7. If personnel working in BCG manufacturing and in animal quarters, 
need to be reassigned to other manufacturing units, they shall not be 
allowed into such units until they pass their health check. 

4. Starting materials:- 
4.1. The source, origin and suitability of active substances, starting 
materials (for example, cryo -protectants and feeder cells), buffers and 
media (for example, reagents, growth media, serum, enzymes, 
cytokines, growth factors and amino acids) and other components of 
the finished product shall be clearly defined and controlled according 
to the principles set out in Part I of this Schedule. 
4.2. Manufacturers shall retain information describing the source and 
quality of the biological materials used for at least one year after the 
expiry date of the finished products and according to regulations 
concerning biological products. It has been found that documents 
retained for longer periods may provide useful information related to 
Adverse Events Followin g Immunisation (AEFI) and other 
investigations. 
4.3. All starting material suppliers (i.e., manufacturers) shall be initially 
qualified on the basis of documented criteria and a risk -based 
approach. Regular assessment of their status shall also be carried out. 
Particular attention shall be given to the identification and monitoring 
of any variability that may affect biological processes. When starting 
materials are sourced from brokers who could increase the risk of 
contamination by performing repackaging operat ions under GMP they 
shall be carefully qualified; an audit may form part of such 
qualification, as needed. 
4.4. An identity test or equivalent, shall be performed on each batch of 
received starting materials prior to release. The number of containers 
sampled sh all be justified on the basis of QRM principles and in 
agreement with all applicable guidelines. The identification of all 
starting materials shall be in compliance with the requirements 
appropriate to the stage of manufacture. The level of testing shall b e 
commensurate with the qualification level of the supplier and the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
nature of the materials used. In the case of starting material used to 
manufacture active substances, the number of samples taken shall be 
based on statistically recognised criteria and QR M principles. 
However, for starting materials and intermediates used in the 
formulation of finished product, each container shall be sampled for 
identity testing in accordance with the main principles of GMP for 
pharmaceutical products unless reduced testing has been validated. 
4.5. The sampling process shall not adversely affect the quality of the 
product. Incoming starting materials shall be sampled under 
appropriate conditions in order to prevent contamination and cross -
contamination. 
4.6. Where justified (such as the special case of sterile starting materials) it 
may be acceptable to reduce the risk of contamination by not 
performing sampling at the time of receipt but to perform the testing 
later, on the samples taken at the time of use. In such cases, release of 
the finished product is conditional upon satisfactory results of these 
tests. 
4.7. Where, the necessary tests for approving starting materials take a 
significantly long time, it may be permissible by exception to process 
starting materials before the test resu lts are available. The use of these 
materials shall be clearly justified in a documented manner, and the 
risks shall be understood and assessed under the principles of QRM. In 
such cases, release of the finished product is conditional upon 
satisfactory results from the tests. It must be ensured that this is not 
standard practice and occurs only with justification of the risk taken. 
4.8. The risk of contamination of starting materials during their passage 
along the supply chain shall be assessed, with particular emphasis on 
adventitious agents such as those causing Transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathies (TSEs). Other materials that come into direct contact 
with manufacturing equipment or with potential product contact 
surfaces (such as filter media, growth medi a during aseptic process 
simulations and lubricants) shall also be controlled. A quality risk 
assessment shall be performed to evaluate the potential for 
adventitious agents in biological starting materials. 
4.9. Where required, the sterilisation of starting ma terials shall be carried 
out by heat, whenever possible. Where necessary, other appropriate 
validated methods may also be used for this purpose (such as 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
irradiation and filtration). 
4.10. The controls required for ensuring the quality of sterile starting 
materials and of the aseptic manufacturing process shall be based on 
the principles and guidance contained in Part II of this Schedule. 
4.11. The transport of critical materials, reference materials, active 
substances, human tissues and cells to the manufacturing site shall be 
controlled as part of a written quality agreement between the 
responsible parties, if they are different commercial entities. 
Manufacturing sites shall have documentary evidence of adherence to 
the specified storage and transport conditions, inclu ding cold chain 
requirements, if required. The required traceability starting at tissue 
establishments through the recipients, and including the traceability of 
materials in contact with the cells or tissues shall be ensured, 
maintained and documented. 

5. Seed lots and cell banks:- 
5.1. The recommendations set out in GMP for API shall be followed taking 
into consideration specific guidance for API manufactured by cell culture 
or fermentation. 
5.2. Where human or animal cells are used as feeder cells in the 
manufacturing process, appropriate controls over their sourcing, testing, 
transport and storage shall be in place. 
5.3. In order to prevent the unwanted drift of genetic properties which might 
result from repeated subcultures or multiple generations, the production 
of biol ogical products obtained by microbial culture, cell culture or 
propagation in embryos and animals shall be based on a system of master 
and working seed lots or cell banks or both; which is the beginning of the 
manufacturing process of certain biological pr oducts (for example, 
vaccines). 
5.4. The number of generations (expressed as passages or doublings) between 
the seed lot or cell bank and the finished product, defined as maximum, 
shall be consistent with the marketing authorisation dossier and shall not 
be exceeded. 
5.5. Cell-based medicinal products are often generated from a cell stock 
obtained from a limited number of passages. In contrast with the two -tier 
system of Master Cell Banks (MCBs) and Working Cell Banks (WCBs), 
the number of production runs from a cell stock is limited by the number 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
of aliquots obtained after expansion and does not cover the entire life -
cycle of the product. Cell stock changes shall be covered by a validation 
protocol and communicated to the National Regulatory Authority (NRA), 
as applicable. 
5.6. Establishment and handling of the MCBs and WCBs shall be performed 
under conditions which are demonstrably appropriate. These shall 
include an appropriately controlled environment to protect the seed lot 
and the cell bank, and the personnel handling them. During the 
establishment of the seed lot and cell bank, no other living or infectious 
material (such as viruses, cell lines or microbial strains) shall be handled 
simultaneously in the same area or by the same persons. 
5.7. Quarantine and release proced ures for master and working cell banks or 
seed lots shall be followed, including adequate characterisation and 
testing for contaminants. Initially, full characterisation testing of the 
MCB shall be done, including genetic identification. A new MCB (from 
a previous initial clone, MCB or WCB) shall be subjected to the same 
established testing as the original MCB, unless otherwise justified. 
Thereafter, the viability, purity and other stability indicating attributes of 
seed lots and cell banks shall be checked regularly according to justified 
criteria. Evidence of the stability and recovery of the seed lots and banks 
shall be documented and records shall be kept in a manner that permits 
trend evaluation. 
5.8. Each storage container shall be adequately sealed, clearl y labelled and 
kept at an appropriate temperature. A stock inventory shall be kept. The 
storage temperature shall be recorded continuously and, where 
applicable, the liquid nitrogen level shall be monitored. Any deviation 
from the set limits, and any corre ctive and preventive action taken, shall 
be recorded. Temperature deviations shall be detected as early as possible 
(for example, through the use of an alarm system for temperature and 
nitrogen levels). 
5.9. Seed lots and cell banks shall be stored and used in such a way so as to 
minimise the risks of contamination or alteration (for example, stored in 
qualified ultra -low temperature freezers or liquid nitrogen storage 
containers). Control measures for the storage of different seeds or cells or 
both in the same area or equipment shall prevent mix -up and shall take 
into account the infectious nature of the materials in order to prevent 
cross-contamination. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
5.10. Master Seed Lots (MSLs), MCBs, and preferably also Working Seed 
Lots (WSLs) and WCBs, shall be stored in two or more controlled 
separate sites in order to minimise the risk of total loss due to natural 
disaster, equipment malfunction or human error. A contingency plan 
shall be in place. 
5.11. The storage and handling conditions for the cell or seed banks shall be 
defined. Access shall be controlled and restricted to authorised personnel 
and appropriate access records maintained. Records of location, identity 
and inventory of individual containers shall also be kept. Once containers 
are removed from the seed lot or cell bank management system, they 
shall not be returned to the stock. 

6. Premises and equipment:- 
6.1. In general, preparations containing live microorganisms or live viruses 
shall not be manufactured and containers shall not be filled in areas 
used for the processing of other pharmaceutical products. However, if 
the manufacturer can demonstrate and validate effective containment 
and decontamination of the live microorganisms and viruses, then the 
use of multi -product facilities may be justifiable. In such cases, 
measures such as campaign production, closed systems or disposable 
systems or both shall be considered and shall be based on QRM 
principles 
6.2. Documented QRM shall be carried out for every additional product in 
a biological manufacturing multi -product facility, w hich may include 
a potency and toxicological evaluation based on cross -contamination 
risks. Other factors to be taken into account include facility or 
equipment design and use, personnel and material flows, 
microbiological controls, physicochemical characteristics of the active 
substance, process characteristics, cleaning processes and analytical 
capabilities relative to the relevant limits established from product 
evaluation. The outcome of the QRM process shall be the basis for 
determining the necessity f or premises and equipment to be dedicated 
to a particular product or product family, and the extent to which this 
shall be the case. This may include dedicating specific product contact 
parts. 
6.3. Inactivated vaccines, antisera and other biological products i ncluding 
those made by rDNA techniques, toxoids and bacterial extracts may, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
following inactivation, be manufactured on the same premises 
provided that adequate decontamination and cleaning measures are 
implemented on the basis of QRM. 
6.4. Cleaning and sanitisation shall take into account the fact that processes 
often include the handling of growth media and other growth -
promoting agents. Validation studies shall be carried out to ensure the 
effectiveness of cleaning, sanitisation and disinfection, including 
elimination of residues of used agents. Environmental and personnel 
safety precautions shall be taken during the cleaning and sanitisation 
processes. The use of cleaning and sanitising agents shall not pose any 
major risk to the performance of equipment. The use of closed systems 
to improve asepsis and containment shall be considered where 
practicable. Where open systems are utilised during processing (for 
example, during addition of growth supplements, media, buffers and 
gases, and during sampling and aseptic manipulations during the 
handling of live cells such as in cell -therapy products) control 
measures shall be put in place to prevent contamination, mix -up and 
cross-contamination. Logical and unidirectional flows of personnel, 
materials and processes, and the use of clean -in-place and sterilise-in-
place systems, shall be considered wherever possible. Where sterile 
single-use systems such as bags and connectors are utilised, they shall 
be qualified with respect to suitability, extractables, leachables and 
integrity. 
6.5. Because of the variability of biological products, and of the 
corresponding manufacturing processes, approved starting materials 
that have to be measured or weighed for the production process (such 
as growth media, solutions and buffers) may be kept in small stocks in 
the production area for a specified period of time according to defined 
criteria for the duration of manufacture of the batch or of the 
campaign. Appropriate storage conditions and controls shall be 
maintained during such temporary st orage. These materials shall not 
be returned to the general stock. Materials used to formulate buffers, 
growth media and so on shall be weighed and made into a solution in a 
contained area using local protection (such as a classified weighing 
booth) and ou tside the aseptic processing areas in order to minimise 
particulate contamination of the later. 
6.6. In manufacturing facilities, the mix -up of entry and exit of personnel 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
shall be avoided through the use of separate changing rooms or 
through procedural control s where Biosafety Risk Group 3 or 4 
organisms are handled. 

7. Containment:- 
7.1. Airborne dissemination of live microorganisms and viruses used for 
the production process, including those from personnel, shall be 
avoided. 
7.2. Adequate precautions shall be taken to av oid contamination of the 
drainage system with dangerous effluents. Drainage systems shall be 
designed in such a way that effluents can be effectively neutralised or 
decontaminated to minimise the risk of cross -contamination. Specific 
and validated decontam ination systems shall be considered for 
effluents when infectious or potentially infectious materials are used 
for production. Regulations issued by the Central Government in this 
regard shall be complied with in order to minimise the risk of 
contamination of the external environment according to the risk 
associated with the biohazardous nature of waste materials. 
7.3. Dedicated production areas shall be used for the handling of live cells 
capable of persistence in the manufacturing environment, for 
pathogenic organisms of Biosafety Risk Group 3 or 4 or for spore -
forming organisms until the inactivation process is accomplished and 
verified. For Bacillus anthracis, Clostridium tetani and Clostridium 
botulinum strictly dedicated facilities shall be utilised for ea ch 
individual product. Up to date information on these and other high -
risk or “special” agents shall be sought from major information 
resources. Where campaign manufacture of spore -forming organisms 
occurs in a facility or suite of facilities, only one pro duct shall be 
processed at any one time. 
7.3.1. Use of any pathogenic organism above Biosafety Risk Group 3 
may be allowed according to the biohazard classification of the 
organism, the risk assessment of the biological product and its 
emergency demand. 
7.4. Production of BCG related product shall take place in a dedicated area 
and by means of dedicated equipment and utilities (such as HVAC 
systems) in order to minimise the hazard of cross-contamination. 
7.5. Specific containment requirements apply to poliomyelitis vaccine to 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
minimise poliovirus facility associated risk and for the safe production 
and quality control of inactivated poliomyelitis vaccine manufactured 
from wild polioviruses. The measures and procedures necessary for 
containment (i.e., for protecting the enviro nment and ensuring the 
safety of the operator) shall not conflict with those for ensuring 
product quality. 
7.6. Air-handling systems shall be designed, constructed and maintained to 
minimise the risk of cross -contamination between different 
manufacturing areas as required. The need for dedicated air handling 
units or single pass systems shall be based on QRM principles, taking 
into account the biohazard classification and containment 
requirements of the relevant organism, and process and equipment 
risks. In the case of Biosafety Risk Group 3 organisms, air shall not be 
recirculated to any other area in the facility and shall be exhausted 
through HEPA filters that are regularly checked for performance. A 
dedicated non-recirculating ventilation system and HEPA filt ering of 
exhaust air are required when handling Biosafety Risk Group 4 
organisms. 
7.7. Primary containment equipment shall be designed and initially 
qualified for integrity in order to ensure that the escape of biological 
agents or material into the immediate w orking area and outside 
environment is prevented. Thereafter, in line with relevant guidelines 
and quality risk management principles, periodical tests shall be 
performed to ensure that the equipment is in proper working 
condition. 
7.8. Activities associated with the handling of live biological agents (such 
as centrifugation and blending of products which can lead to aerosol 
formation) shall be contained in such a way so as to prevent 
contamination of other products or the egress of live agents into the 
working or outside environment or both. The viability of such 
organisms and their biohazard classification shall be taken into 
consideration as part of the management of such risks. Accidental 
spillages, especially of live organisms, must be dealt with quickly and 
safely. Validated decontamination measures shall be available for 
each organism or groups of related organisms. Where different strains 
of a single bacteria species or very similar viruses are involved, the 
decontamination process may be validated with on e representative 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
strain, unless the strains vary significantly in their resistance to the 
decontaminating agents used. 
7.9. Areas where Biosafety Risk Group 3 or 4 organisms are handled shall 
always have a negative air pressure relative to the environment. This 
will ensure the containment of the organism in unlikely events such as 
failure of the door interlock. Air -lock doors shall be interlocked to 
prevent them from being opened simultaneously. Differential pressure 
alarms shall be present wherever required and shall be validated and 
monitored. 
7.10. Air vent filters shall be hydrophobic and subject to integrity testing at 
intervals determined by a QRM approach. 
7.11. Where the filtration of exhaust air is necessary, the safe changing of 
filters shall be ensured or bag -in-bag-out housings shall be employed. 
Once removed, filters shall be decontaminated and properly 
destroyed. In addition to HEPA filtration other inactivation 
technologies such as heat inactivation and steam scavenging may be 
considered for exhaust air to ensu re effective inactivation of 
pathogenic organisms of Biosafety Risk Group 3 or 4. 

8. Clean rooms:- 
8.1. In order to address the specific manufacturing processes involved in 
the production of biological products, and particularly vaccines, the 
environmental monito ring of clean rooms in vaccine manufacturing 
facilities; points to consider for manufacturers of human vaccines 
guidance document may be used to develop the environmental 
classification requirements for biological manufacturing processes. As 
part of the co ntrol strategy, the degree of environmental control of 
particulate and microbial contamination of the production premises 
shall be adapted to the intermediate or finished product and also to the 
production step, taking into account the potential level of 
contamination of the starting materials and the risks to the finished 
product. 
8.2. The environmental monitoring programme shall be supplemented with 
methods to detect the presence of the specific microorganisms used 
for production (for example, recombinant yeas t and toxin or 
polysaccharide producing bacteria). The environmental monitoring 
programme may also include detection of the produced organisms and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
adventitious agents of production organisms, especially when 
campaign manufacture is applied on the basis of QRM principles. 

9. Production:- 
9.1. Since cultivation conditions, media and reagents are designed to promote 
the growth of cells or microbial organisms, typically in an axenic 
state, particular attention shall be paid to the control strategy for 
ensuring that effective steps are in place for preventing or minimising 
the occurrence of unwanted bioburden, endotoxins, viruses of animal 
and human origin and associated metabolites. 
9.2. The QRM process shall be the basis for implementing the technical and 
organisational measures required to control the risks of contamination 
and cross-contamination. These could include, though are not limited 
to- 
(i) carrying out processing and filling in segregated areas; 
(ii) containing material transfer by means of an airlock and appropriate 
type of pass box with validated transfer procedures, clothing 
change and effective washing and decontamination of equipment; 
(iii) recirculation of only treated (HEPA filtered) air; 
(iv) acquiring knowledge of the key characteristics (for example, 
pathogenicity, detectab ility, persistence and susceptibility to 
inactivation) of all cells, organisms and any adventitious agents 
within the same facility; 
(v) when considering the acceptability of concurrent work in cases 
where production is characterised by multiple small batches from 
different starting materials (for example, cell -based products) 
taking into account factors such as the health status of donors and 
the risk of total loss of a product from or for specific patients 
during development of the cross-contamination control strategy; 
(vi) preventing the risk of live organisms and spores entering non -
related areas or equipment by addressing all potential routes of 
cross-contamination (for example, through the HVAC system) 
through the use of single use components and closed systems; 
(vii) conducting environmental monitoring specific to the 
microorganism being manufactured in adjacent areas while 
paying attention to cross-contamination risks arising from the use 
of certain monitoring equipment (used for airborne particle 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
monitoring) in areas handling live or spore -forming organisms or 
both; and 
(viii) using campaign-based production. 
9.3. When applicable, the inoculum preparation area shall be designed so as 
to effectively control the risk of contamination, and shall be equipped 
with a biosafety hood for primary containment. 
9.4. If possible, growth media shall be sterilisedin situ by heat or in -line 
microbial-retentive filters. Additionally, in-line microbial-retentive filters 
shall be used for the routine addition of gases, media, acids, alkalis and 
so on to fermenters or bioreactors. 
9.5. Data from continuous monitoring of certain production processes 
(fermentation) shall form part of the batch record. Where continuous 
culture is used, special consideration shall be given to parameters such as 
temperature, pH, pO2, CO2 and the rate of feed or carbon source with 
respect to growth of cells. 
9.6. In cases where a viral inactivation or removal process is performed, 
measures shall be taken (for example, in relation to facility layout, 
unidirectional flow and equipment) to avoid the risk of recontamination 
of treated products by non-treated products. 
9.7. A wide variety of equipment and components (for example, resins, 
matrices and cassettes) are used for purification purposes. QRM 
principles shall be applied to devise the contr ol strategy regarding such 
equipment and associated components when used in campaign 
manufacture and in multi -product facilities. The reuse of components at 
different stages of processing of one product is discouraged but, if 
performed, shall be validated. Acceptance criteria, operating conditions, 
regeneration methods, lifespan and sanitisation or sterilisation methods, 
cleaning process, and hold time between the use of reused components 
shall be defined and validated. The reuse of components for different 
products is not acceptable. 
9.8. Where adverse donor (human or animal) health information becomes 
available after procurement or processing or both, and this information 
relates to product quality, then appropriate measures shall be taken 
including product recall, if applicable. 
9.9. Antibiotics may be used during the early stages of production to help 
prevent inadvertent microbial contamination or to reduce the 
bioburden of living tissues and cells. In this case, the use of antibiotics 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
shall be well justified, and they shall be cleared from the 
manufacturing process at the stage specified in the marketing 
authorisation. Acceptable residual levels shall be defined and 
validated. Penicillin and other beta lactam antibiotics shall not be used 
at any stage of the process. 
9.10. A procedure shall be in place to address equipment or accessories failure 
or both (air vent filter failure) which shall include a product impact 
review. If such failures are discovered following batch release, the 
Licensing Authority shall be notified a nd the need for a batch recall 
shall be considered. 

10. Campaign production:- 
10.1. The decision to use a facility or filling line for campaign manufacture 
shall be justified in a documented manner and shall be based on a 
systematic risk approach for each product ( or strain) taking into 
account the containment requirements and the risk of cross -
contamination to the next product. Campaign changeover procedures, 
including sensitive techniques used for the determination of residues, 
shall be validated and proper cle aning acceptance criteria shall be 
defined on a toxicology basis of product residues from the last 
campaign, as applicable. Equipment assigned to continued production 
or to campaign production of successive batches of the same 
intermediate product shall be cleaned at appropriate validated 
intervals to prevent build -up and carryover of contaminants (product 
degradants or objectionable levels of microorganisms). 
10.2. For downstream operations of certain products (for example, pertussis 
or diphtheria vaccines) camp aign production may be acceptable if 
well justified. For finishing operations (formulation and filling) the 
need for dedicated facilities or the use of campaigns in the same 
facility will depend on the specific characteristics of the biological 
product, on the characteristics of the other products (including any 
non-biological products), on the filling technologies used (single use 
closed systems). Labelling and packaging operations can be carried 
out in a multiproduct facility. 
10.3. Campaign changeover inv olves intensive decontamination or 
sterilisation (if required) and cleaning of the equipment and 
manufacturing area. Decontamination or sterilisation (if required) and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
cleaning shall include all equipment and accessories used during 
production, as well as the facility itself. The following 
recommendations shall be considered, namely:- 
(i) waste shall be removed from the manufacturing area or sent to 
the bio-waste system in a safe manner; 
(ii) materials shall be transferred by a validated procedure; and 
(iii) the Quality Unit shall confirm area clearance by inspection, and 
review the campaign changeover data (including monitoring 
results) prior to releasing the area for the next product. 
10.4. When required, the corresponding diluent for the product can be filled 
in the same faci lity in line with the defined campaign production 
strategy for finished product. 
10.5. When campaign-based manufacturing is considered, the facility layout 
and the design of the premises and equipment shall permit effective 
cleaning and decontamination or steril isation (if required) based on 
QRM principles and validated procedures following the production 
campaign. In addition, consideration may need to be given at the 
design stage of facility layout to the possible need for fumigation. 

11. Labelling:- 
11.1. The information provided on the inner label (also called the container 
label) and on the outer label (on the packaging) shall be readable and 
legible and the content approved by the Licensing Authority. 
11.2. Minimal key information shall be printed on the inner label and 
additional information shall be provided on the outer label (for 
example, carton) or product leaflet or both. 
11.3. The suitability of labels for low and ultra -low storage temperatures 
shall be verified, if applicable. The label shall remain properly 
attached to the container under different storage conditions during the 
shelf-life of the product. The label and its adhesive shall have no 
adverse effect on the quality of the product caused by leaching, 
migration or other means. 

12. Validation:- 
12.1. Biological processes, ha ndling of live materials and using campaign -
based production, if applicable, are the major aspects of biological 
product manufacturing which require process and cleaning validation. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
The validation of such processes given the typical variability of 
biological products, the possible use of harmful and toxic materials 
and the need for inactivation processes plays an important role in 
demonstrating production consistency and in proving that the critical 
process parameters and product attributes are controlled. 
12.2. A QRM approach shall be used to determine the scope and extent of 
validation. 
12.3. All critical biological processes (including inoculation, multiplication, 
fermentation, cell disruption, inactivation, purification, virus removal, 
removal of toxic and harmful additives, filtration, formulation and 
aseptic filling) are subject, as applicable, to process validation. 
Manufacturing control parameters to be validated may include 
specific addition sequences, mixing speeds, time and temperature 
controls, limits of light exposure and containment. 
12.4. After initial process validation studies have been finalised and routine 
production has begun, critical processes shall be subject to monitoring 
and trending with the objective of assuring consistency and detecting 
any unexpected variability. The monitoring strategy shall be defined, 
taking into consideration factors such as the inherent variability, 
complexity of quality attributes and heterogeneity of biological 
products. A system or systems for detecting unplanned departures 
from the process as designed shall be in place to ensure that the 
process remains in a state of control. Collection and evaluation of 
information and data on the performance of the process will allow for 
detection of undesired process variability and will determine whether 
action shall be taken to prevent, anticipate or correct problems so that 
the process remains under control. 
12.5. Cleaning validation shall be performed in order to confirm the 
effectiveness of cleaning procedures designed to remove biological 
substances, growth media, process reagents, cleaning agents, 
inactivation agents and so on. Careful consideration shall be given to 
cleaning validation when campaign-based production is practiced. 
12.6. Critical processes for inactivation or elimination of poten tially 
harmful microorganisms of Biosafety Risk Group 2 or above, 
including genetically modified ones, are subject to validation. 
12.7. Process revalidation may be triggered by a process change as part of 
the change control system. In addition, because of the va riability of 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
processes, products and methods, process revalidation may be 
conducted at pre -determined regular intervals according to risk 
considerations. A detailed review of all changes, trends and deviations 
occurring within a defined time period for exa mple, one year, based 
on the regular Product Quality Review (PQR) may indicate a need for 
process revalidation. 
12.8. The integrity and specified hold times of containers used to store 
intermediate products shall be validated unless such intermediate 
products are freshly prepared and used immediately. 

13. Quality Control:- 
13.1. As part of quality control sampling and testing procedures for 
biological materials and products, special consideration shall be 
given to the nature of the materials being sampled (for exam ple, the 
need to avoid contamination, ensure biocontainment or cold chain 
requirements) in order to ensure that the testing carried out is 
representative. 
13.2. Samples for post -release use typically fall into one of two categories 
reference samples or retention samples for the purposes of analytical 
testing and identification respectively. For finished products the 
reference and retention samples will in many instances be presented 
identically as fully packaged units. In such circumstances, reference 
and retention samples may be regarded as interchangeable. 
13.2.1. Reference samples of biological starting materials shall be 
retained under the recommended storage conditions for at least 
one year beyond the expiry date of the corresponding finished 
product. Reference sampl es of other starting materials 
(other than solvents, gases and water) as well as 
intermediates for which critical parameters cannot be tested in 
the final product shall be retained for at least two years after 
the release of the product if their s tability allows for this 
storage period. Certain starting materials such as components 
of growth media need not necessarily be retained. 
13.2.2. Retention samples of a finished product shall be stored in their 
final packaging at the recommended storage conditions for at 
least one year after the expiry date. 
13.3. For cell -based products, microbiological tests (for example, sterility 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
tests or purity checks) shall be conducted on cultures of cells or cell 
banks free of antibiotics and other inhibitory substances in order t o 
provide evidence of the absence of bacterial and fungal 
contamination, and to be able to detect fastidious organisms where 
appropriate. Where antibiotics are used, they shall be removed by 
filtration at the time of testing. 
13.4. The traceability, proper use a nd storage of reference standards shall 
be ensured, defined and recorded. The stability of reference standards 
shall be monitored, and their performance trended. The National or 
World Health Organisation (WHO) Recommendations for the 
preparation, characterisation and establishment of biological reference 
standards shall be followed. 
13.5. All stability studies including real time or real condition stability, 
accelerated stability and stress testing shall be carried out. Trend 
analysis of the test results from the stability monitoring programme 
shall assure the early detection of any process or assay drift and this 
information shall be part of the PQR of biological products. 
13.6. For products where on -going stability monitoring would normally 
require testing using anima ls and no appropriate alternative or 
validated techniques are available, the frequency of testing may take 
into account a risk -based approach. The principle of bracketing and 
matrix designs may be applied if scientifically justified in the stability 
protocol. 
13.7. All analytical methods used in the quality control and in -process 
control of biological products shall be well characterised, validated 
and documented to a satisfactory standard in order to yield reliable 
results. The fundamental parameters of this val idation include 
linearity, accuracy, precision, selectivity, specificity, sensitivity and 
reproducibility. 
13.8. For test methods described in relevant pharmacopoeial monographs, 
qualification of the laboratory test equipment and personnel shall be 
performed. In addition, repeat precision and comparability precision 
shall be shown in the case of animal tests. Repeatability and 
reproducibility shall also be demonstrated by reviewing retrospective 
test data. In addition to the common parameters typically used for 
validating assays (accuracy and precision) additional measurements 
(for example, of the performance of references, critical reagents or 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
cell lines or both) shall be considered during the validation of 
bioassays based on the biological nature of the assay an d reagents 
used. 

14. Documentation (batch processing records):- 
14.1. In general, the processing records of regular production batches shall 
provide a complete account of the manufacturing activities of each 
batch of biological product showing that it has been prod uced, tested 
and dispensed into containers in accordance with the approved 
procedures. In the case of vaccines, a batch processing record and a 
summary protocol shall be prepared for each batch for the purpose of 
lot release by the Licensing Authority. The information included in 
the summary protocol for independent lot release of vaccines by 
regulatory authorities. The summary protocol and all associated 
records shall be of a type approved by the Licensing Authority. 
14.2. Manufacturing batch records shall be re tained for at least one year 
after the expiry date of the batch of the biological product and shall be 
readily retrievable for inspection by the Licensing Authority. It has 
been found that documents retained for longer periods may provide 
useful information related to AEFI and other investigations. 
14.3. Starting materials may require additional documentation on source, 
origin, supply chain, method of manufacture and controls applied in 
order to ensure an appropriate level of control, including the 
microbiological quality, if applicable. 
14.4. Some product types may require a specific definition of what 
materials constitute a batch particularly somatic cells in the context of 
ATMPs. For autologous and donor matched situations, the 
manufactured product shall be viewed as a batch. 

15. Use of animals:- 
15.1. A wide range of animals is used for the manufacture or quality 
control of biological products. Special considerations are required 
when animal facilities are present at a manufacturing site. 
15.2. The presence of live animals in the p roduction area shall be avoided 
unless otherwise justified. Embryonated eggs are allowed in the 
production area, if applicable. If the extraction of tissues or organs 
from animals is required then particular care shall be taken to prevent 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
contamination of the production area (for example, appropriate 
disinfection procedures shall be undertaken). 
15.3. Areas used for performing tests involving animals or microorganisms 
shall be well separated from premises used for the manufacturing of 
products and shall have comp letely separate ventilation systems and 
separate staff. The separation of different animal species before and 
during testing shall be considered, as the necessary animal 
acclimatisation process, as part of the test requirements. 
15.4. In addition to monitoring c ompliance with TSE regulations and other 
adventitious agents that are of concern (including those causing 
zoonotic diseases and diseases in source animals) shall also be 
monitored and recorded in line with specialist advice on establishing 
such programmes. Instances of ill health occurring in the source or 
donor animals shall be investigated with respect to their suitability 
and the suitability of in -contact animals, for continued use (for 
example, in manufacture, as sources of starting materials and for 
quality control and safety testing). Decisions shall be documented. 
15.5. A look -back procedure shall be in place in relation to the decision 
making process used to evaluate the continued suitability of the 
biological active substance or finished product in which animal 
sourced starting materials have been used or incorporated. This 
decision making process may include the retesting of reference 
samples from previous collections from the same donor animal 
(where applicable) to establish the last negative donation. T he 
withdrawal period of therapeutic agents used to treat source or donor 
animals shall be documented and shall be taken into account when 
considering the removal of those animals from the programme for 
defined periods. 
15.6. Particular care shall be taken to pre vent and monitor infections in 
source or donor animals. Measures taken shall cover sourcing, 
facilities, husbandry, biosafety procedures, testing regimes, control of 
bedding and feed materials, one hundred percent fresh air supply, 
appropriate design of th e HVAC system, water supply and 
appropriate temperature and humidity conditions for the species being 
handled. This is of special relevance to Specific Pathogen -Free (SPF) 
animals where pharmacopoeial monograph requirements shall be met. 
Housing and health monitoring shall also be defined for other 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
categories of animals (for example, healthy flocks or herds). 
15.7. For products manufactured from transgenic animals, traceability shall 
be maintained in the creation of such animals from the source 
animals. 
15.8. For different animal species and lines, key criteria shall be defined, 
monitored and recorded. This may include the age, sex, weight and 
health status of the animals. 
15.9. Animals, biological agents and tests carried out shall be appropriately 
identified to prevent any risk of mix -up and to control all identified 
hazards. 
15.10. The facility layout shall ensure a unidirectional and segregated flow 
of healthy animals, inoculated animals and waste decontamination 
areas. Personnel and visitors shall also follow a defined flow in order 
to avoid cross-contamination. 

16. Complaints:- 
16.1. The person responsible for handling complaints and deciding on the 
measures to be taken to deal with them shall have appropriate training 
or experience in the specific features of the quality control of 
biological products. 
16.2. There are basically two types of complaints, product quality 
complaints and adverse reactions or events. 
16.3. The first type of complaint may be caused by problems such as faulty 
manufacture, product defects or deterioration as well as, partic ular to 
biological products, adulteration of the biological products. These 
complaints shall be recorded in detail and the causes thoroughly 
investigated (e.g., by comparison with the reference samples kept 
from the same batch). There shall also be writte n procedures to 
describe the action to be taken. 
16.4. To address the second type of complaint, reports of any adverse 
reaction or event shall be entered in a separate register in accordance 
with requirements. An investigation shall be conducted to find out 
whether the adverse reaction or event is due to a quality problem and 
whether such reactions or events have already been reported in the 
literature or whether it is a new observation. In either case, complaint 
records shall be reviewed regularly to detect any specific or recurring 
problems requiring special attention and possible recall of marketed 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
products. The safety monitoring of biological products shall be 
carried out through pharmacovigilance systems dealing with specific 
issues relating to adverse reacti ons and adverse events following 
treatment with biological products. 
16.5. The licensing authority shall be kept informed of any complaints 
leading to a recall or restriction on supply and the records shall be 
available for inspection. 

17. Product recalls: - Recall and Rapid Alert System for Drugs (including 
Biological and Vaccine) shall be in place for the product recall. 

PART V 

SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR RADIOPHARMACEUTICAL 
PRODUCTS 
Note.- Good Manufacturing Practices for pharmaceutical products: Main 
principles as given in Part I shall be complied for the manufacture of 
Radiopharmaceutical Products. In addition to these requirements, the 
following specific requirements shall also be followed, namely:— 
1. Principles:- Radiopharmaceuticals shall be manufactured in accordance with 
the basic principles of GMP. The matters covered under this Part shall 
therefore be considered as supplementary to the general requirements for 
GMP and relate specifically to the production and control of 
radiopharmaceuticals. Many radiopharma ceuticals are released and 
administered to patients shortly after their production because of their short 
half-lives, so that quality control may sometimes be retrospective. In view of 
the same, strict adherence to GMP is mandatory. 

2. Personnel:- 
2.1. The manufa cturing establishment, whether a hospital radiopharmacy, 
centralised radio -pharmacy, nuclear centre or institution, industrial 
manufacturer or Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Centre and its 
personnel shall be under the control of a person who has a proven record 
of academic achievement together with a demonstrated level of practical 
expertise and experience in radio -pharmacy and radiation hygiene. 
Supporting academic and technical personnel shall have the necessary 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
post graduate or technical training and experience appropriate to their 
functions. 
2.2. Personnel required to work in radioactive, clean and aseptic areas shall 
be selected with care, to ensure that they can be relied on to observe the 
appropriate codes of practice and are not subject to any disease or 
condition that can compromise the integrity of the product. Health 
checks on personnel shall be requested before employment and 
periodically thereafter. Any changes in personal health status (e.g., in 
haematology) may require the temporary exclusion of the person from 
further radiation exposure. 
2.3. Only the minimum number of personnel required shall be present in 
clean and aseptic areas when work is in progress. Access to these areas 
shall be restricted during the preparation of radiopharmaceuticals, kits or 
sterile set -ups. Inspection and control procedures shall be conducted 
from outside these areas as far as possible. 
2.4. During the working day, personnel may pass between radioactive and 
non-radioactive areas only if the safety rules of radiation control (he alth 
physics control) are followed. 
2.5. The release of a batch may be approved only by an authorised person or a 
person with academic qualifications officially registered as a suitably 
qualified person, and with appropriate experience in the manufacture of 
radiopharmaceuticals. 
2.6. To ensure the safe manufacture of radiopharmaceuticals, personnel shall 
be trained in GMP, the safe handling of radioactive materials and 
radiation safety procedures. They shall also be required to take periodic 
courses and receive training to keep abreast of the latest developments in 
their fields. 
2.7. Training records shall be maintained and periodic assessments of the 
effectiveness of training programmes shall be made. 
2.8. All personnel engaged in production, maintenance and testing shall 
follow the relevant guidelines for handling radioactive products and be 
monitored for possible contamination or irradiation exposure or both. 

3. Premises and equipment:- 
3.1. As a general principle, buildings must be located, designed, constructed, 
adapted and mainta ined to suit the operations to be carried out within 
them. Laboratories for the handling of radioactive materials must be 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
specially designed to take into consideration aspects of radiation 
protection in addition to cleanliness and sterility. Interior surfa ces 
(walls, floors and ceilings) shall be smooth, impervious and free from 
cracks; they shall not shed matter and shall permit easy cleaning and 
decontamination. Drains shall be avoided wherever possible and, unless 
essential, shall be excluded from aseptic areas. 
3.2. Specific disposal systems shall be mandatory for radioactive effluents. 
These systems shall be effectively and carefully maintained to 
prevent contamination and exposure of personnel to the radioactive 
waste both within and outside the facility. 
3.3. Sinks shall be excluded from aseptic areas. Any sink installed in other 
clean areas shall be of suitable material and be regularly sanitised. 
Adequate precautions shall be taken to avoid contamination of the 
drainage system with radioactive effluents. 
3.4. Lighting, heating, ventilation and, if necessary, air -conditioning shall 
be designed to maintain a satisfactory temperature and relative 
humidity to ensure the comfort of personnel working in protective 
clothing. Buildings shall be in a good state of repair. The condition of 
the buildings shall be reviewed regularly and repairs carried out when 
and where necessary. Special care shall be exercised to ensure that 
building repair or maintenance operations do not compromise the 
products. Premises shall provide sufficient space for the operations to be 
carried out, allowing an efficient flow of work and effective 
communication and supervision. All buildings and rooms shall be 
clean, sanitary and free from radioactive contamination. 
3.5. Ventilation of radiopharmaceutical production facilities shall meet the 
requirement to prevent the contamination of products and the exposure 
of working personnel to radioactivity. Suitable pressure and airflow 
patterns shall be maintained by appropriate isolation or enveloping 
methods. Air handling systems for both radioactive and non -radioactive 
areas shall be fitted with alarms so that the working personnel in the 
laboratory are warned of any failure of these systems. 
3.6. Dedicated facilities and equipment shall be u sed for the manufacture of 
any radiopharmaceutical product derived from human blood or plasma. 
Autoclaves used in production areas for radio - pharmaceuticals may be 
placed behind a lead shield to minimise the radiation exposure of the 
operators. Such auto claves shall be checked for contamination 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
immediately after use to minimise the possibility of cross-contamination 
by radioactivity of the products in the next autoclave cycles. 
3.7. All containers of radiopharmaceutical substances, regardless of the stage 
of manufacture, shall be identified by securely attached labels. Cross -
contamination shall be prevented by the adoption of some or all of the 
following measures, namely:- 
(i) processing and filling in segregated areas; 
(ii) avoiding the manufacture of different products at the same time, 
unless they are effectively segregated; 
(iii) containing material transfer by means of airlocks, air extraction, 
changing clothes and careful washing and decontamination of 
equipment; 
(iv) protecting against the risks of contamination caused by 
recirculation of untreated air or by accidental re-entry of extracted air; 
(v) using “closed systems” of manufacture; 
(vi) taking care to prevent aerosol formation; and 
(vii) using sterilised containers. 
3.8. Positive pressure areas shall be used to process sterile products. In 
general, any radioactivity shall be handled within specifically designed 
areas maintained under negative pressures. The production of sterile 
radioactive products shall therefore be carried out under negative 
pressure s urrounded by a positive pressure zone ensuring that 
appropriate air quality requirements are met. 
3.9. Separate air -handling units shall be used for radioactive and non -
radioactive areas. Air from operations involving radioactivity shall be 
exhausted through ap propriate filters that are regularly checked for 
performance. 
3.10. Pipework, valves and vent filters shall be properly designed to facilitate 
validated cleaning and decontamination. 

4. Production:- 
4.1. SOPs must be available for all operating procedures and shall be 
regularly reviewed and kept up to date for all manufacturing operations. 
All entries on batch records shall be initiated by the operator and 
independently checked by another operator or supervisor. 
4.2. Specifications for starting materials shall include detail s of their source, 
origin and (where applicable) method of manufacture and of the controls 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
used to ensure their suitability for use. Release of a finished product 
shall be conditional on satisfactory results being obtained in the tests on 
starting materials. 
4.3. Careful consideration shall be given to the validation of sterilisation 
methods. 
4.4. A wide variety of equipment is used in the preparation of 
radiopharmaceuticals. Equipment for chromatography shall, in general, 
be dedicated to the preparation and purific ation of one or several 
products labelled with the same radionuclide to avoid radioactive cross -
contamination. The life span of columns shall be defined. Great care 
shall be taken in cleaning, sterilising and operating freeze -drying 
equipment used for the preparation of kits. 
4.5. A list of critical equipment shall be drawn up, including any 
equipment such as a balance, pyrogen oven, dose calibrator, sterilising 
filter, etc., where an error in the reading or function could potentially 
cause harm to th e patient being given the final product. These devices 
shall be calibrated or tested at regular intervals and shall be checked 
daily or before production is started. The results of these tests shall be 
included in the daily production records. 
4.6. Specific equ ipment for radioactive measurements may be required as 
well as radioactive reference standards. For the measurement of very 
short half -lives, national central laboratories shall be contacted to 
calibrate the apparatus. Where this is not possible, alternati ve 
approaches, such as documented procedures, may be used. 
4.7. In the case of labelling kits, freeze drying shall be carried out as an 
aseptic procedure. If an inert gas such as nitrogen is used to fill vials, it 
must be filtered to remove possible microbial contamination. 
4.8. The dispensing, packaging and transportation of radiopharmaceuticals 
shall comply with the relevant provisions of the Atomic Energy Act 
1962 and the rules made thereunder. 

5. Labelling:- 
5.1. All products shall be clearly identified by labels, which must remain 
permanently attached to the containers under all storage conditions. An 
area of the container shall be left uncovered to allow inspection of the 
contents. If the final container is not suitable for labelling, the label shall 
appear on its package. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
5.2. The labels of radiopharmaceuticals shall comply with the requirements 
specified in rule 96. 
5.3. The label on the container shall show- 
(a) the name of the drug product or the product identification code or 
both; 
(b) the name of the radionuclide; 
(c) the name of the manufacturer or the company and the person 
responsible for placing the drug on the market; 
(d) the radioactivity per unit dose- 
(i) for liquid preparations, the total radioactivity in the container, or 
the radioactive concentration per millilitre, at a stated date and, if 
necessary, hour, and the volume of liquid in the container; 
(ii) for solid preparations, such as freeze dried preparations, the total 
radioactivity at a stated date and, if necessary, hour; 
(iii) for capsules, the radioactivity of each capsule at a stated date and, 
if necessary, hour, and the number of capsules in the container; 
and 
(iv) where relevant, the international symbol for radioactivity. 
5.4. The label on the package shall state- 
(a) the qualitative and quantitative composition; 
(b) the radioactive isotopes and the amount of radioactivity at the time 
of dispatch; 
(c) the route of administration; 
(d) the expiry date; 
(e) any special storage conditions; and 
(f) mandatory information related to transport regulations for 
radioactive materials. 
5.5. The leaflet in the package shall contain th e specific product information 
and indications for use. This information is especially important for 
preparation kits (cold kits), and shall include- 
(a) the name of the product and a description of its use; 
(b) the contents of the kit; 
(c) the identification and qua lity requirements concerning the radio 
labelling materials that can be used to prepare the 
radiopharmaceutical, namely- 
(i) the directions for preparing the radiopharmaceutical, including 
the range of activity and the volume, together with a statement 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
of the s torage requirements for the prepared 
radiopharmaceutical; 
(ii) a statement of the shelf -life of the prepared radio 
pharmaceutical; 
(iii) the indications and contraindications (pregnancy, children, drug 
reactions, etc.) in respect of the prepared radiopharmaceutical; 
(iv) warnings and precautions in respect of the components and the 
prepared radiopharmaceutical, including radiation safety 
aspects; 
(v) where applicable, the pharmacology and toxicology of the 
prepared radiopharmaceutical, including the route of elimination 
and the effective half-life; 
(vi) the radiation dose that a patient will receive from the prepared 
radiopharmaceutical; 
(vii) the precautions to be taken by users and patients during the 
preparation and administration of the product and the special 
precautions for the disp osal of the container and any 
unconsumed portions; 
(viii) a statement of the recommended use of the prepared radio - 
pharmaceutical and the recommended dosage; 
(ix) a statement of the route of administration of the prepared 
radiopharmaceutical; and 
(x) if appropriate, for particular kits (i.e., those subject to variability 
beyond the recommended limits), the methods and 
specifications needed to check radiochemical purity. 

6. Production and distribution records:- 
6.1. The processing records of regular production batches must provid e a 
complete account of the manufacturing history of each batch of a 
radiopharmaceutical, showing that it has been manufactured, tested, 
dispensed into containers and distributed in accordance with the written 
procedures. 
6.2. Separate records for the receipt, storage, use and disposal of radioactive 
materials shall be maintained in accordance with the relevant provisions 
of the Atomic Energy Act 1962 and the rules made thereunder. 
6.3. Distribution records shall be kept. Since the return of radioactive 
products is not practical, the purpose of recall procedures for such 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
products is to prevent their use rather than an actual return. 

7. Quality assurance and quality control:- 
7.1. Radiopharmaceuticals are nearly always used before all quality control 
testing (e.g., tests f or sterility, endotoxin, radionuclidic purity, etc.) has 
been completed. The implementation of and compliance with the quality 
assurance programme are therefore essential. 
7.2. Quality assurance or quality control or both shall have the following 
principal responsibilities, namely- 
(a) the preparation of detailed instructions for each test and analysis; 
(b) ensuring the adequate identification and segregation of test samples 
to avoid mix-ups and cross-contamination; 
(c) ensuring that environmental monitoring and equipment and process 
validation are conducted as appropriate for evaluating the adequacy 
of the manufacturing conditions; 
(d) the release or rejection of starting materials and intermediate 
products; 
(e) the release or rejection of packaging and labelling materials; 
(f) the release or rejection of each batch of finished preparation; 
(g) the evaluation of the adequacy of the conditions under which the 
starting materials, intermediate products and finished 
radiopharmaceutical preparations are stored; 
(h) the evaluation of the quality and stability of the finished products 
and, when necessary, of the starting materials and intermediate 
products; 
(i) the establishment of expiry dates on the basis of the validity period 
related to specified storage conditions; 
(j) the establishment and revision of t he control procedures and 
specifications; 
(k) assuming the responsibility for retaining samples of 
radiopharmaceutical products; and 
(l) assuming the responsibility for keeping adequate records of the 
distribution of the radiopharmaceutical products. 
7.3. Whenever the size of the establishment permits, quality assurance and 
quality control duties shall be organised in separate groups. Quality 
assurance shall also include the monitoring and validation of the 
production process. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
7.4. A manufacturer’s quality control laboratory shall be separated from the 
production area. The control laboratory shall be designed, equipped and 
of such a size as to be a self -contained entity, with adequate provision 
for the storage of documents and samples, the preparation of records and 
the performance of the necessary tests. 
7.5. The performance of all qualitative and quantitative tests mentioned in the 
specifications for the starting materials may be replaced by a system of 
certificates issued by the supplier of these materials, provided that- 
(a) there is a history of reliable production; 
(b) the producer or supplier is regularly audited; and 
(c) at least one specific identity test is conducted by the manufacturer of 
the finished radiopharmaceutical. 
7.6. Samples of the intermediate and final products shall be retain ed in 
sufficient amounts and under appropriate storage conditions to allow 
repeated testing or verification of a batch control. These samples shall 
be kept for an appropriate period in accordance with the shelf -lives of 
the radioactive components concerned . However, this may sometimes 
not be applicable, e.g., for radiopharmaceuticals with a short half-life. 
7.7. Sampling procedures may be adapted for the purposes of sampling, the 
type of controls being applied, and the nature of the material being 
sampled (e.g., a small batch size or its radioactive content or both). The 
procedure shall be described in a written protocol. 

PART VI 
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR PHYTOPHARMACEUTICALS 
This Part shall apply to phytopharmaceutical drugs as defined under 
clause (eb) of rule 2,in addition to other relevant Parts based on the dosage 
form. 

Note.—Good Manufacturing Practices for pharmaceutical products: Main 
principles as given in Part I shall be complied for the manufacture of 
Phytopharmaceuticals. In addition to these require ments, the following 
specific requirements shall also be followed, namely:— 

1. General:- 
1.1. Unlike conventional pharmaceutical products, which are usually 
produced from synthetic materials by means of reproducible 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
manufacturing techniques and procedures, phytop harmaceuticals are 
prepared from materials of plant origin, which are often obtained from 
varied geographical or commercial sources. As a result it may not 
always be possible to ascertain the conditions to which they may 
have been subjected. In ad dition, they may vary in composition and 
properties. Furthermore, the procedures and techniques used in the 
manufacture and quality control of phytopharmaceuticals are often 
substantially different from those employed for conventional 
pharmaceutical products. 
1.2. Because of the inherent complexity of naturally grown medicinal plants 
and the often variable nature of cultivated ones, the examples of 
contamination with toxic medicinal plants or plant parts and the number 
and small quantity of defined active ingred ients, the production and 
primary processing has a direct influence on the quality of 
Phytopharmaceuticals. For this reason, application of GMPs in the 
manufacture of Phytopharmaceuticals is an essential tool to assure their 
quality. 

2. Quality assurance in the manufacture of Phytopharmaceuticals: - In 
addition to the use of modern analytical techniques (especially High 
Performance Thin-Layer Chromatography (HPTLC), Gas Chromatography 
(GC), High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC), Capillary 
Electrophoresis (CE), Mass Spectrometry (MS) and Atomic Absorption 
(AA) to characterise phytopharmaceuticals, quality assurance also requires 
the control of starting materials, storage and processing. For this reason, an 
appropriate quality assurance system shall be ap plied in the manufacture of 
phytopharmaceuticals. 

3. Good manufacturing practice for Phytopharmaceuticals: - The general 
principles of GMP are set out in the Part I. Cultivation and collection of 
medicinal plants, as the starting materials for phytopharmaceut icals are not 
covered under this Schedule. The first critical step of their production where 
the application of GMP starts shall be clearly designated. This is of 
particular importance for those products which consist solely of comminuted 
or powdered plant materials. 

4. Sanitation and hygiene:- 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
4.1. Because of their origin, plant materials may contain microbiological 
contaminants. Furthermore, during the course of harvesting and 
processing, phytopharmaceuticals that may be especially prone to 
microbiological contamination are produced. To avoid alterations and to 
reduce contamination in general, a high level of sanitation and hygiene 
during manufacture is necessary. 
4.2. Water supply to the manufacturing unit shall be monitored and if 
necessary treated appropriately to ensure consistency of quality. 
4.3. Waste from the manufacturing unit shall be disposed of regularly so as 
to maintain a high standard of hygiene in the manufacturing area. 
Clearly marked waste bins shall be available, emptied and cleaned as 
needed, on daily basis. 

5. Qualification and validation:- 
5.1. Qualification of critical equipment, process validation and change 
control are particularly important in the production of 
Phytopharmaceuticals with unknown therapeutically active constituents. 
In this case, the reprod ucibility of the production process is the main 
means for ensuring consistency of quality, efficacy and safety between 
batches. 
5.2. The written procedure shall specify critical process steps and factors 
(such as extraction time, temperature and solvent purity) and acceptance 
criteria, as well as the type of validation to be conducted (e.g., 
retrospective, prospective or concurrent) and the number of process 
runs. 
5.3. A formal change control system shall be established to evaluate the 
potential effects of any change s on the quality of the 
Phytopharmaceuticals, particularly content of the active ingredients. 
Scientific judgement shall be used to determine which additional testing 
and validation studies are appropriate to justify a change in a validated 
process. 

6. Complaints:- 
6.1. The person responsible for handling complaints and deciding on the 
measures to be taken to deal with them shall have appropriate training 
or experience in the specific features of the quality control of 
Phytopharmaceuticals. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6.2. There are basically two types of complaints, product quality complaints 
and adverse reactions or events. 
6.3. The first type of complaint may be caused by problems such as faulty 
manufacture, product defects or deterioration, particular to 
Phytopharmaceuticals, adulteration of the plant material. These 
complaints shall be recorded in detail and the causes thoroughly 
investigated (e.g., by comparison with the reference samples kept from 
the same batch). There shall also be written procedures to describe the 
action to be taken. 
6.4. To ad dress the second type of complaint, reports of any adverse 
reaction or event shall be entered in a separate register. An 
investigation shall be conducted to find out whether the adverse 
reaction or event is due to quality problem and whether such reaction s 
or events have already been reported in the literature or whether it is a 
new observation. In either case, complaint records shall be reviewed 
regularly to detect any specific or recurring problems requiring special 
attention and possible recall of marketed products. 
6.5. The licensing authority shall be kept informed of any complaints 
leading to a recall or restriction on supply and the records shall be 
made available for inspection. 

7. Product recalls:-In case of quality failures or serious adverse events of life 
threatening situations, the products shall be recalled in prompt and effective 
manner up to the retailers’ level. There shall be a SOP for storage of recalled 
Phytopharmaceuticals in a secure segregated area. 

8. Contract production and analysis:- 
8.1. The c ontract partner shall have adequate premises and equipment for 
the production of Phytopharmaceuticals according to GMP. Validated 
methods shall be applied for cleaning the equipment and premises 
carefully before using them to produce different products. In the case 
of raw materials used for producing food, it is realistic to require 
manufacturing departments to be separated from those where the plant 
raw material will be cut or powdered for use in the preparation of 
drugs. 
8.2. Technical aspects of the contract shall be drawn up by the competent 
persons suitably knowledgeable on the specific characteristics of 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Phytopharmaceuticals, including their production and quality control 
testing. 

9. Self-inspection:-At least one member of the self -inspection team shall 
possess a thorough knowledge of Phytopharmaceuticals. 

10. Personnel:- 
10.1. The release of phytopharmaceuticals shall be authorised by a person 
who has been trained in the specific features of the processing and 
quality control of plant materials, plant preparations and finished 
phytopharmaceutical products. 
10.2. Personnel dealing with the production and quality control of 
Phytopharmaceuticals shall have adequate qualifications and training 
in the specific issues relevant to Phytopharmaceuticals. 

11. Training:- 
11.1. The personnel sha ll have adequate training in appropriate fields such 
as pharmaceutical technology, taxonomic botany, phytochemistry, 
pharmacognosy, hygiene, microbiology and related subjects (such as 
traditional use of Phytopharmaceuticals). 
11.2. Training records shall be main tained and periodic assessments of the 
effectiveness of training programmes shall be made. 

12. Personal hygiene:- 
12.1. Personnel entrusted with the handling of plant materials, plant 
preparations and finished plant products shall be required to have a 
high degree of personal hygiene and to have received adequate training 
in maintaining appropriate standards of hygiene. The personnel shall 
not work, if they have infectious diseases or skin diseases. Written 
procedures listing the basic hygiene requirements shall be made 
available. 
12.2. Personnel must be protected from contact with toxic irritants and 
potentially allergenic plant materials by means of adequate protective 
clothing. They shall wear suitable gloves, caps, masks, work suits and 
shoes throughout the whole proce dure from plant processing to 
product manufacture. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
13. Premises:- 
13.1. As a general principle, premises shall be designed, located, 
constructed, adapted and maintained to suit the operations to be 
carried out according to good manufacturing practices for 
pharmaceutical products as given in Part I. 
13.2. Because of their potential for degradation and infestation with certain 
pests as well as their sensitivity to microbiological contamination, 
production and particularly storage of plant materials and plant 
preparations shall assume special importance. 
13.3. Storage areas- 
13.3.1. Storage areas shall be well organised and tidy. Special 
attention shall be paid to cleanliness and good maintenance. 
Any accidental spillage shall be cleaned up immediately using 
methods that minimise the risk of cross - contamination of 
other materials and shall be reported. 
13.3.2. The set -up of storage areas depends on the type of materials 
stored. The areas shall be well labelled and materials stored in 
such a way so as to avoid any risk of cross -contamination. An 
area shall be identified for the quarantine of all incoming plant 
materials. 
13.3.3. Storage areas shall be laid out to permit effective and orderly 
segregation of the various categories of materials stored and to 
allow rotation of stock. Different plant materials shall be stored 
in separate areas. 
13.3.4. To protect the stored material and reduce the risk of pest 
attacks, the duration of storage of any plant material in 
unpacked form shall be kept to a minimum. 
13.3.5. Incoming fresh plant materials shall be processed, unless 
specified otherwise, as soon as possible. If appropriate, they 
shall be stored between 2 °C and 8 °C, whereas frozen 
materials shall be stored below –18 °C. 
13.3.6. Where materials are stored in bulk, to reduce the risk of mould 
formation or fermentation, it is advisa ble to store them in 
aerated rooms or containers using natural or mechanical 
aeration and ventilation. These areas shall also be equipped in 
such a way as to protect against the entry of insects or animals, 
especially rodents. Effective measures shall be t aken to limit 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
the spread of animals and microorganisms brought in with the 
plant material and to prevent cross-contamination. 
13.3.7. Plant materials, even when stored in fibre drums, bags or 
boxes, shall be stored off the floor and suitably spaced to 
permit cleaning and inspection. 
13.3.8. The storage of plants, extracts, tinctures and other preparations 
may require special conditions of humidity and temperature or 
protection from light; appropriate steps shall be taken to ensure 
that these conditions are provided, mainta ined, monitored and 
recorded. 
13.3.9. Plant materials, including raw plant materials, shall be kept in 
a dry area protected from moisture and processed following the 
principle of “first in, first out” (FIFO). 
13.4. Production areas- 
13.4.1. Production areas shall comply with the general requirements of 
good manufacturing practices for pharmaceutical products: 
main principles (see Part I). As a rule, campaign work in their 
processing is necessary. However, if feasible, the use of 
dedicated premises is encouraged. Moreover, the special nature 
of the production of Phytopharmaceuticals requires that 
particular attention be given to processing products that 
generate dust. When heating or boiling of the materials is 
necessary, a suitable air exhaust mechanism shall be employed 
to prevent accumulation of fumes and vapours. 
13.4.2. To facilitate cleaning and to avoid cross -contamination, 
adequate precautions shall be taken during the sampling, 
weighing, mixing and processing of medicinal plants, e.g., by 
use of dust extraction and air -handling systems to achieve the 
desired differential pressure and net airflow. 

14. Equipment:- 
14.1. Processing of plant materials may generate dust or material which is 
susceptible to pest -infestation or microbiological contamination and 
cross- contamination. Effective cleaning of the equipment is therefore 
particularly important. 
14.2. Vacuum or wet -cleaning methods are preferred. If wet -cleaning is 
done, the equipment shall be dried immediately after cleaning to 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
prevent the growth of microorganisms. Cleaning with compressed air 
and brushes shall be done with care and avoided if possible, as these 
methods increase the risk of product contamination. 
14.3. Non-wooden equipment shall be used unless tradition demands 
wooden material. Where it is necessary to use traditional equipment 
(such as wooden implements, clay pots, pallets, hoppers, etc.), this 
shall be dedicated, unless otherwise justified. When such equipment 
is used, it is advisable that it does not come into direct contact with 
chemicals or contaminated material. If the use of wooden equipment 
is unavoidable, special consideration must be given to its cleaning as 
wooden materials may retain odours, be easily discoloured and are 
easily contaminated. 

15. Materials:- 
15.1. All incoming plant materials shall be quarantined and stored under 
appropriate conditions that take into account the degradability of plant 
materials and plant preparations. 
15.2. Only permitted substances shall be used for fumigation and allowable 
limits for their residues together with specifications for the apparatus 
used shall be set. 

16. Reference samples and standards: - The reference standard for a 
phytopharmaceuticals may be a botanical sample of the plant material; a 
sample of the plant preparation, e.g., Extract; or a chemically defined 
substance, e.g., a known active cons tituent, a marker substance or a known 
impurity. The reference standard shall be of a quality appropriate to its 
purpose. If the phytopharmaceuticals is not described in a recognised 
pharmacopoeia, a herbarium sample of the flowering or fruiting top of the 
whole medicinal plant or part of the medicinal plant (e.g., if the whole 
medicinal plant is a tree) shall be available. All reference standards shall be 
stored under appropriate conditions to prevent degradation. Their expiry or 
revalidation date or both shall be determined and indicated. 

17. Documentation:- The general principles for documentation are set out in 
Part I. 

18. Specifications:- 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
18.1. The specifications for starting materials, for plant preparations and 
finished phytopharmaceuticals are primarily intended to define the 
quality rather than to establish full characterisation, and shall focus on 
those characteristics found to be useful in ensuring safety and efficacy. 
Consistent quality for Phytopharmaceuticals (finished products) can 
only be assured, if the starting plant materials are defined in a rigorous 
and detailed manner. In some cases more detailed information may be 
needed on aspects of collection or agricultural production. For 
instance, the selection of seeds, conditions of cultivation and 
harvesting are important aspects in producing a reproducible quality of 
Phytopharmaceuticals. Their characterisation (which also includes a 
detailed evaluation of the botanical and phytochemical aspects of the 
medicinal plant, manufacture of the Phytopharmaceutica l preparation 
and the finished Phytopharmaceutical product) is therefore essential to 
allow the establishment of specifications which are both 
comprehensive and relevant. The specifications for plant materials 
shall as far as possible include, as a minimum , the following 
information- 

18.1.1. Plant materials:- 
18.1.1.1. The family and botanical name of the plant used 
according to the binomial system (genus, species, 
variety and the authority, i.e., the reference to the 
originator of the classification, e.g., Linnaeus). 
18.1.1.2. Details of the source of the plant, such as country or 
region (also collected from the wild and, where 
applicable, method of cultivation, dates and conditions 
of harvesting (e.g., whether there was extreme weather), 
collection procedures, collection area, and brand, 
quantity and date of pesticide application, as per the 
WHO Guidelines on good agricultural and collection 
practices. 
18.1.1.3. Whether the whole plant or only a part is used. In the 
latter case, which part of the plant is used and its state, 
e.g., whole or re duced. For dried plant material, the 
drying system shall be specified, if applicable. 
18.1.1.4. A description of the plant material based on visual 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(macroscopic) or microscopic examination or both. 
18.1.2. Suitable identity tests including, where appropriate, 
identification tests (such as Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC) 
or other chromatographic fingerprint) for known active 
ingredients or markers. A reference sample shall be available for 
identification purposes. 
18.1.3. Details of the assay, where appropriate, of active constituen ts or 
markers. 
18.1.4. Limit tests such as dry residue of liquids, ash value (total ash 
and ash insoluble in hydrochloric acid), water -soluble 
extractives, moisture or water content and loss on drying (taking 
into account the presence of essential oils if any). 
18.1.5. Suitable methods for the determination of possible pesticide 
contamination and the acceptable limits for such contamination 
in plant materials or plant preparations used in the manufacture 
of Phytopharmaceuticals. 
18.1.6. Tests for toxic metals and for likely contam inants, foreign 
materials and adulterants. 
18.1.7. Tests for fungal, microbiological contamination, fumigant 
residues (if applicable), mycotoxins (aflatoxins), pest -
infestations, radioactivity and their acceptable limits. 
18.1.8. Other appropriate tests (e.g., particle si ze, swelling index and 
residual solvents in Phytopharmaceutical preparations and 
biological fingerprints such as induced fluorescent markers). 
18.1.9. Specifications for starting materials (and also of primary or 
printed packaging materials) shall include, if appl icable, 
reference to a pharmacopoeial monograph. 
18.1.10. If the plant material for processing does not comply with its 
quality specifications, the norms that apply for its rejection and 
to storage and disposal of the rejected plant material, shall be 
included. 
18.1.11. Qualitative and quantitative information on the active 
ingredients or constituents with known therapeutic activity in 
plant materials and plant preparations shall be given as 
described in paragraph 23.5 (Packaging materials and labelling) 
of this Part. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
19. Finished phytopharmaceuticals:- 
19.1. Tests for microbiological contamination and tests for other toxicants. 
19.2. Uniformity of weight (e.g., for tablets, single -dose powders, 
suppositories, capsules and powder in sachets), disintegration time 
(for tablets, capsules, supp ositories and pills), hardness and friability 
(for example, uncoated tablets), viscosity (for internal and external 
fluids), consistency (semisolid preparations), and dissolution 
(tablets or capsules), if applicable. 
19.3. Physical appearance such as colou r, odour, form, shape, size and 
texture. 
19.4. Loss on drying or water content. 
19.5. Identity tests, qualitative determination of relevant substances of the 
plants (e.g., fingerprint chromatograms). 
19.6. Quantification of relevant active ingredients, if they have been 
identified, and the analytical methods that are available. 
19.7. Limit tests for residual solvents. 
19.8. Other specifications as per the general monograph under the Indian 
Pharmacopeia for the applicable dosage forms. 
19.9. The control tests and specifications for the finishe d 
phytopharmaceutical product shall be such as to allow the qualitative 
and quantitative determination of the main active constituents. If the 
therapeutic activity of constituents is known, these constituents shall 
be indicated in the documentation. If suc h substances are not known 
(e.g., because they are part of a complex mixture), the constituents 
useful for assessing the quality shall be identified as markers. In both 
cases, the assay (i.e., quantitative determination) specifications shall 
be defined. Wh en the therapeutic activity of the constituents cannot 
be determined quantitatively, specifications shall be based on the 
determination of markers. 
19.10. If either the final product or the phytopharmaceutical preparation 
contains several plant materials and a qu antitative determination of 
each active ingredient is not feasible, the mixture of several active 
ingredients may be determined. The need for such a procedure shall 
be justified. 
19.11. The concept of different acceptance criteria for release versus shelf -
life specifications applies to finished phytopharmaceutical drugs only 
and not to plant materials and plant preparations. Adequate retest 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
periods shall be established for the latter. Example, where this may be 
applicable include assay and impurity (degradation product) levels. 

20. Plant preparations: -The specifications of plant preparations consist, 
depending on the preparation in question, of the relevant items of the 
specifications for plant materials or for finished phytopharmaceutical 
products as specified in the preceding paragraph. 

21. Processing instructions:- 
21.1. The processing instructions shall describe the different operations to 
be performed on the plant material, such as drying, crushing, milling 
and sifting. They shall also include the time and, if applicable, 
temperatures required in the drying process and the methods to be used 
to control fragment or particle size. Instructions on removing foreign 
matter and other unwanted materials shall also be given. 
21.2. The drying conditions chosen shall be appropriate to the type of plant 
material processed. This depends on both the character of the active 
ingredients (e.g., essential oils) and the type of plant part collected 
(e.g., root, leaf or flower). Drying by direct exposure to sunlight, if not 
specifically contraindicated, is possible, but drying on the ground shall 
be avoided. If the plant shall be processed fresh, without drying, the 
reasons and criteria determining the use of fresh material shall be 
stated. 
21.3. For the production of processed extracts, the instructions shall specify 
details of any vehicle or solvent that may be used, the duration and 
temperature needed for extraction, and any concentration stages and 
methods that may be required. 
21.4. The permissible environmental conditions e.g., temperature, humidity 
and standard of cleanliness, shall be stated. 
21.5. Any treatment, such as fumigation, used to reduce fungal or 
microbiological contamination or other infestation, together with 
methods of determining the extent of such contamination and potential 
residues, shall be documented. Instructions on the conduct of such 
procedures shall be available and shall include details of the process, 
tests and allowable limits for residues together with specifications for 
apparatus used. 
21.6. Steps in the processes of blending and adjustme nt to reach defined 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
contents of pharmacologically active constituents shall be clearly 
documented. 
21.7. The rules that apply to the disposal of spent plant material after 
processing shall also be elaborated. 

22. Good practices in production:- 
22.1. To ensure not only th e quality, but also the safety and efficacy of 
complex products of biological origin such as Phytopharmaceuticals, it 
is essential that the steps in their production are clearly defined. 
22.2. Selection of the first production step covered in this Part,- 
22.2.1. For med icinal plants which are either cultivated or collected 
from the wild, and which may be used in crude form or 
subjected to simple processing techniques (cutting or 
comminuting) the first critical step of their production, i.e., 
where the application of these guidelines starts, shall be clearly 
designated. The rationale for this designation shall be stated 
and documented. Guidance is provided below. However, for 
processes such as extraction, fermentation and purification, 
this rationale shall be established on a case to case basis- 
(a) collection or cultivation or harvesting of medicinal plants 
shall follow other relevant guidance; 
(b) generally, post harvest processing including primary cutting 
is (or shall be) covered by Good Agricultural Practices 
guidelines (GA P). If further comminuting is carried out in 
the manufacturing processing, it shall be covered by GMP. 
If cutting and comminuting considerably reduce the 
probability of detection of adulteration or mix -up of plant 
materials, application of the parameters u nder this Part may 
be extended to encompass these steps; 
(c) when the active ingredient, consists exclusively of 
comminuted or powdered herbs, application of parameters 
under this Part starts at the physical processing following 
primary cutting and comminuting, and includes packaging; 
(d) when phytopharmaceutical extracts are used, the principles 
of parameters under this Part shall apply to any production 
step following postharvest processing; and 
(e) in the case of finished plant products manufactured by 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
fermentation, application of GMP shall cover any 
production step following primary cutting and comminuting. 
Particular attention shall be given to the introduction of cells 
from a cell bank into the fermentation process. 
22.3. General considerations- 
22.3.1. Materials shall be handl ed in a fashion that is not detrimental 
to the product. On arrival at the processing facility, the plant 
material shall be promptly unloaded and unpacked. During this 
operation, the plant material shall not come into direct 
contact with the soil. Moreover, it shall not be exposed 
directly to the sun (except in cases where this is a specific 
requirement, e.g., sun -drying) and it shall be protected from 
rain and microbiological contamination. 
22.3.2. Attention shall be paid to “classification” of clean area 
requirements taking into account the possible high degree of 
initial microbial contamination of plant materials. 
Classification of premises as applied to sites for the production 
of other pharmaceutical substances may not be applicable to 
processing of pla nt materials. Specific and detailed 
requirements shall be developed to cover microbial 
contamination of equipment, air, surfaces and personnel, and 
also for rest rooms, utilities, ancillary and supporting 
systems (e.g., water and compressed air). 
22.3.3. Care shall be taken to choose cleaning methods appropriate to 
the characteristics of the plant materials being processed. 
Washing dried plant materials with water is generally 
inappropriate. When it is necessary to clean them, an air duster 
or air shower shall be employed. In cases when immersion of 
plant materials in water or other appropriate agents (such as 
disinfectants) for cleaning is unavoidable (e.g., to eliminate 
suspected coliform bacteria), it shall be kept to a minimum. 
22.3.4. The presence of plant ma terials from different species and 
varieties, or different plant parts shall be controlled during the 
entire production process to avoid contamination, unless it is 
assured that these materials are equivalent. 
22.3.5. If time limits are specified in the master pro duction 
instructions, these limits shall not be exceeded, to ensure the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
quality of intermediates and finished products. The less is 
known about the constituents responsible for the therapeutic 
activity, the more strictly this rule shall be obeyed. Such tim e 
limits, however, may be inappropriate when processing to 
achieve a target value (e.g., drying to a predetermined 
specification) because completion of processing steps is 
determined by in-process sampling and testing. 
22.4. Mixing of batches and blending- 
22.4.1. Phytopharmaceutical drugs with constituents of known 
therapeutic activity are often standardised (i.e., adjusted to a 
defined content of such constituents). The methods used to 
achieve such standardisation shall be documented. If another 
substance is added for these purposes, it is necessary to 
specify, as a range, the quantity that may be added. Blending 
different batches of a specific plant material (e.g., before 
extraction) or by mixing different lots of similar plant 
preparations may also be acceptable. Rec ords shall be 
maintained to ensure traceability. The blending process shall 
be adequately controlled and documented and the blended 
batch shall be tested for conformity with established 
specifications where appropriate. 
22.4.2. Batches shall be mix ed only if it can be guaranteed that the 
mixture will be homogeneous. Such processes shall be well 
documented. 
22.4.3. Out-of-specification batches of phytopharmaceutical drugs 
shall not be blended with other batches for the purpose of 
meeting specifications, exce pt for standardization of the 
content of constituents with known pharmaceutical 
therapeutic effect. Every batch incorporated into the blend 
shall have been manufactured using an established process 
and shall have been individually tested and found to meet 
with the appropriate specifications prior to blending. 
22.4.4. Where particular physical attributes of the material are 
critical, blending operations shall be validated to show 
uniformity of the combined batch. Validation shall include 
testing of critical attribut es (e.g., particle size distribution, 
bulk density and tap density) that may be affected by the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
blending process. 
22.4.5. The expiry date of the blended batch shall be chosen 
according to the date of manufacture of the oldest batch in the 
blend. 

23. Good practices in quality control:- 
23.1. General- 
23.1.1. The personnel of quality control units shall have the necessary 
expertise in Phytopharmaceuticals to enable them to carry out 
identification tests and recognise adulteration, the presence 
of fungal growth or infestatio ns and lack of uniformity in a 
consignment of plant materials. 
23.1.2. The quality control of the plant material, plant preparations 
and finished plant products shall establish their quality, but 
does not imply the control of every single constituent. 
23.2. Sampling- Plant materials are an aggregate of individual plants or 
different parts of the same plant and thus, have an element of 
heterogeneity, sampling shall be carried out with special care by 
personnel with the necessary expertise. 
23.3. Testing- 
23.3.1. The identity and qualit y of plant material, plant preparations 
and of finished phytopharmaceutical products shall be tested. 
23.3.2. Plant material, plant preparations (including extracts) and 
finished products can be categorised as follows- 
(a) the active constituents are identified, and may be quantified 
as such; 
(b) the main group of components which contribute to the 
activity (i.e., the constituents with known therapeutic 
activity) are known and can be quantified as a total (e.g., 
essential oils) or calculated using a representative substa nce 
belonging to the group (e.g., flavonoids); 
(c) the former is not identified or not quantifiable or both, but 
marker substances are; and 
(d) others, where quantification (i.e., specification for a certain 
quantity of a constituent) is not applicable or feasible. 
23.3.3. Identification methods may be based on- 
(i) physical and if applicable, macroscopic (organoleptic) and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
microscopic tests; 
(ii) chromatographic procedures [TLC, HPLC, HPTLC or Gas 
Liquid Chromatography (GLC)], spectrometric techniques 
[ultraviolet-visible (UV -VIS), IR, Nuclear Magnetic 
Resonance (NMR), MS]; and 
(iii) chemical reactions. 
23.3.4. The identification test methods shall be specific for the plant 
material, preparation or finished product and ideally shall be 
capable of discriminating between the required plant materia l 
and potential substitutes or adulterants that are likely to occur. 
The identification methods used for group (a) and group(b) 
shall be capable of detecting the said active ingredients and at 
least the main ingredients shall be stated on the label. For 
group (c), the analytical procedure shall be based on 
characteristic constituents, if any. 
23.3.5. Reference samples of plant materials shall be made available 
for use in comparative tests e.g., visual and microscopic 
examination and chromatography. 
23.3.6. Quantitative det ermination of known active components for 
members of group(a) and group(b) and of markers for 
members of group (c) is necessary. 
23.3.7. The development and execution of quality control methods 
for plant materials, preparations and the finished products 
shall be in line with paragraph 18 (Specifications) of this Part. 
Tests and quality requirements that are characteristic of the 
given analyte shall be selected. 
23.3.8. Particularly for plant materials in group (d) and for finished 
products containing such materials, characteristic 
chromatograms (fingerprint chromatograms) may be 
applicable. Using these methods may ensure that the main 
constituents can be easily followed throughout the production 
process. Caution is necessary, however, for every delive ry of 
plant materials and every batch of plant preparations 
(including extracts) will have slightly different chromatograms 
or fingerprints resulting from differences in chemical 
compositions caused by intrinsic or extrinsic factors. 
23.4. Stability studies- 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
23.4.1. If the expiry date for a plant material or phytopharmaceutical 
preparation is given, some stability data to support the 
proposed shelf -life under the specified storage conditions 
shall be available. Stability data are always required to support 
the shelf -life proposed for the finished products (guidance 
document reference) 
23.4.2. Finished phytopharmaceutical products may contain several 
plant materials or plant preparations, and it is often not feasible 
to determine the stability of each active ingredie nt. Moreover, 
because the plant material, in its entirety, is regarded as the 
active ingredient, a mere determination of the stability of the 
constituents with known therapeutic activity will not usually 
be sufficient. Chromatography allows tracing of changes which 
may occur during storage of a complex mixture of biologically 
active substances contained in plant materials. It shall be 
shown, as far as possible, e.g., by comparisons of appropriate 
characteristics or fingerprint chromatograms that th e identified 
active ingredient (if any) and other substances present in the 
plant material or finished product are likewise stable and that 
their content as a proportion of the whole remains within the 
defined limits. 
23.4.3. The fingerprint methods used for the stability studies shall be as 
similar as possible to those used for quality control purposes. 
23.4.4. For identified active ingredients, constituents with known 
therapeutic activity and markers, widely used general methods 
of assay and physical and sensory or other appropriate tests 
may be applied. 
23.4.5. To determine the shelf -life of finished products, strong 
emphasis shall also be placed on other tests in paragraph 18 
(Specifications), i.e., moisture content, microbial contamination 
and general dosage form control tests. 
23.4.6. The stability of preservatives and stabilisers shall be monitored. 
When these are not used, alternative tests shall be done to 
ensure that the product is self-preserving over its shelf-life. 
23.4.7. Samples used for stability studies shall be stored in the 
containers intended for marketing. 
23.4.8. Normally the first three commercial production batches shall be 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
included in the stability monitoring programme to confirm the 
expiry date. However, where data from previous studies, 
including pilot batches, show that the produ ct is expected to 
remain stable for at least two years, fewer than three batches 
can be used. The testing frequency depends on the 
characteristics of the phytopharmaceutical medicinal products 
and shall be determined on a case-to-case basis. 
23.4.9. 23.4.9 The pro tocol for on -going stability studies shall be 
documented. This would normally involve one batch per 
year being included in a stability monitoring programme. 
23.5. Packaging materials and labeling- 
23.5.1. All packaging materials, such as bottles and other mat erials 
shall be stored properly. Controls on the issue and use of these 
packaging materials shall be adequate to ensure that incorrect 
labels and cartons are not used. 
23.5.2. All containers and closures shall be thoroughly cleaned and 
dried before being used to pack the products. 
23.5.3. 23.5.3 There shall be adequate information on the label (or the 
package insert) to inform the users of the composition of the 
product (in addition to the brand name, if any), indications or 
actions, directions for use, cautions and advers e reactions if 
any, and the expiry date. 
23.5.4. Finished plant products may contain several plant materials or 
plant preparations. Unless otherwise fully justified, the full 
quantitative composition of the phytopharmaceutical 
ingredients shall be stated on the pr oduct label. If this is not 
possible, at least the main ingredients shall be stated on the 
label while the full qualitative composition could appear on the 
package insert. 
23.5.5. The qualitative and quantitative particulars of the active 
ingredients in plant mate rials and plant preparations shall be 
expressed in the following manner, namely- 
23.5.5.1. For plant materials and plant preparations consisting of 
comminuted or powdered plant materials- 
(a) the quantity of the plant material must be stated or, if 
constituents with kno wn therapeutic activity are 
unidentified, the quantity of the plant material or 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
phytopharmaceutical preparation shall be stated; or 
(b) the quantity of the plant material or 
phytopharmaceutical preparation shall be given as a 
range, corresponding to a defined quantity of 
constituents with known therapeutic activity. 
23.5.5.2. For plant preparations produced by steps, which exceed 
commination, the nature and concentration of the 
solvent and the physical state of the extract shall be 
given. Furthermore, the following shall be indicated- 
(a) the equivalent quantity or the ratio of a 
phytopharmaceutical material to 
phytopharmaceutical preparation must be stated, if 
therapeutic activity of the constituents is unknown 
(this does not apply to fatty or essential oils); or 
(b) if the ther apeutic activity of the constituents is 
known, the quantity of the phytopharmaceutical 
preparation may be given as a range, corresponding 
to a defined quantity of the constituents with known 
therapeutic activity. 
23.5.6. The composition of any solvent or solvent mixture used and the 
physical state of the extract shall be identified. 
23.5.7. If any other substance is added during the manufacture of 
the phytopharmaceutical preparation to adjust the level of 
constituents of known therapeutic activity, or for any o ther 
purpose, the added substances shall be described as such or 
as “other ingredients” and the genuine extract as the “active 
ingredient”. However, where different batches of the same 
extract are used to adjust constituents with known therapeutic 
activity to a defined content or for any other purpose, the final 
mixture shall be regarded as the genuine extract and listed as 
the “active ingredient” in the unit formula. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
PART VII 
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF 
INVESTIGATIONAL PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTS FOR 
CLINICAL TRIALS IN HUMANS 
Note.—Good Manufacturing Practices for pharmaceutical products: 
Main principles as given in Part I shall be complied for the manufacture 
of Investigational Pharmaceutical Products for Clinical Trials in Humans. 
In addition to these requirements, the following specific requirements 
shall also be followed, namely:— 
1. General considerations:- 
1.1. This Part supplements the general principle of GMP as specified in Part 
I and the guidelines on Good Clinical Practices (GCP) f or clinical trials 
on pharmaceutical products in India. The application of the principles of 
GMP to the preparation of investigational products to be used in Phase I 
or Phase II or Phase III of the clinical studies is necessary. 
1.1.1. To assure consistency betwe en and within batches of the 
investigational product and thus assure the reliability of clinical 
trials. 
1.1.2. To assure consistency between the investigational product and 
the future commercial product and therefore the relevance of the 
clinical trial to the efficacy and safety of the marketed product. 
1.1.3. To protect subjects of clinical trials from poor -quality 
products resulting from manufacturing errors (omission of critical 
steps such as sterilisation, contamination and cross-contamination, 
mix-ups, wrong labelling, etc.) or from starting materials and 
components of inadequate quality. 
1.1.4. To document all changes in the manufacturing process. 

1.2. In this context, the selection of an appropriate dosage for clinical trials 
is important. While it is acc epted that in early trials (Phase I or Phase 
II), the dosage form may be very different from the anticipated final 
formulation (e.g., a capsule instead of a tablet), in the pivotal Phase III 
studies, it shall be similar to the projected commercial presenta tion; 
otherwise these trials will not necessarily prove that the marketed 
product is both efficacious and safe. 
1.3. If there are significant differences between the clinical and commercial 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
dosage forms, data shall be submitted to the Licensing Authorities to 
demonstrate that the final dosage form is equivalent, in terms of 
bioavailability and stability, to that used in the clinical trials. Final 
manufacturing methods must be revalidated following changes in 
processes, scaling-up, transfer to other manufacturing sites, etc. 
1.4. This document specifically addresses those practices that may be 
different for investigational products, which are usually not 
manufactured in accordance with a set routine and which may possibly 
be incompletely characterised during the initia l stages of clinical 
development. 

2. Quality assurance:- 
2.1. Quality assurance of pharmaceutical products has been defined and 
discussed in detail in Part I. 
2.2. The quality of dosage forms in Phase III clinical studies shall be 
characterised and assured at the same level as for routinely 
manufactured products. The quality assurance system, designed, 
established and verified by the manufacturer, shall be described in 
writing, taking into account the GMP principles to the extent that they 
are applicable to the opera tions in question. This system shall also 
cover the interface between the manufacture and the trial site (e.g., 
shipment, storage, occasional additional labelling). 

3. Validation:- 
3.1. Some of the production processes for investigational products that have 
not received marketing authorisation may not be validated to the extent 
necessary for a routine production operation. The product specifications 
and manufacturing instructions may vary during development. The 
increased complexity in the manufacturing operation s requires a highly 
effective quality assurance system. 
3.2. For sterile products, there shall be no reduction in the degree of 
validation of sterilising equipment required. Validation of aseptic 
processes presents special problems when the batch size is small, since 
the number of units filled may not be adequate for a validation exercise. 
Filling and sealing, which is often done by hand, can compromise the 
maintenance of sterility. Greater attention shall therefore be given to 
environmental monitoring. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 

4. Complaints:- The conclusions of any investigation carried out in response 
to a complaint shall be discussed between the manufacturer and the sponsor 
(if different) or between the persons responsible for manufacture and 
those responsible for the relevan t clinical trial in order to assess any 
potential impact on the trial and on the product development, to 
determine the cause and to take any necessary corrective action. 

5. Recalls:- Recall procedures shall be understood by the sponsor, investig ator 
and monitor in addition to the persons responsible for recalls as described in 
the guide on GMP. 

6. Personnel:- Although it is likely that the number of staff involved will 
be small, people shall be separately designated as responsible for 
production and quality control. All production operations shall be carried 
out under the control of a clearly identified responsible person. Personnel 
concerned with development, involved in production and quality control, 
need to be instructed in the principles of GMP. 

7. Premises and equipment:- 
7.1. During the manufacture of investigational products, different products 
may be handled in the same premises and at the same time and this 
reinforces the need to eliminate all risks of contamination, inclu ding 
cross-contamination. Special attention shall be paid to line clearance in 
order to avoid mix -ups. Validated cleaning procedures shall be 
followed to prevent cross-contamination. 
7.2. For the production of particular products, campaign working may be 
acceptable in place of dedicated and self -contained facilities. Because 
the toxicity of the materials may not be fully known, cleaning is of 
particular importance; account shall be taken of the solubility of the 
product and excipients in various cleaning agents. 

8. Materials:- 
8.1. Starting materials- 
8.1.1. The consistency of production may be influenced by the quality of 
the starting materials. Their physical, chemical and, when 
appropriate, microbiological properties shall therefore be defined, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
documented i n their specifications, and controlled. Existing 
compendial Standards, shall be taken into consideration. 
Specifications for active ingredients shall be as comprehensive as 
possible, given the current state of knowledge. Specifications for 
both active and non-active ingredients shall be periodically 
reassessed. 
8.1.2. Detailed information on the quality of active and non -active 
ingredients, as well as of packaging materials, shall be available 
so as to make it possible to recognise and as necessary, allow for 
any variation in production. 
8.1.3. Chemical and biological reference standards for analytical 
purposes. 
8.1.4. Reference standards from reputable sources shall be used, if 
available; otherwise the reference substances for the active 
ingredients shall be prepared, tested an d released as reference 
materials by the producer of the investigational pharmaceutical 
product or by the producer of the active ingredient used in the 
manufacture of that product. 
8.1.5. Detailed information on reference products for clinical trials shall 
be in accordance with the New Drugs and Clinical Trial Rules, 
2019. 
8.1.6. In studies in which an investigational product is compared 
with a marketed product, steps shall be taken to ensure the 
integrity and quality of the reference products (final do sage form, 
packaging materials, storage conditions, etc.). If significant 
changes are to be made in the product, data shall be available 
(e.g., on stability, comparative dissolution) that demonstrate that 
these changes do not influence the original qualit y characteristics 
of the product. 

9. Documentation:- 
9.1. Specifications (for starting materials, primary packaging materials, 
intermediate and bulk products and finished products), master formulae 
and processing and packaging instructions may be changed frequent ly 
as a result of new experience in the development of an investigational 
product. Each new version shall take into account the latest data and 
include a reference to the previous version so that traceability is 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
ensured. Rationale for changes shall be stated and recorded. 
9.2. Batch processing and packaging records shall be retained for at least 
two years after the termination or discontinuance of the clinical trial, or 
after the approval of the investigational product. 
9.3. The sponsor may request the processing or packaging of a certain 
number of units or their shipping. It may only be given by the sponsor 
to the manufacturer of an investigational product. It shall be in writing 
(though it may be transmitted by electronic means), precise enough 
to avoid an y ambiguity and formally authorised, and refer to the 
approved product specification file. 
9.4. Product specification files- 
9.4.1. A product specification file or files shall contain the information 
necessary to draft the detailed written instructions on processin g, 
packaging, quality control testing, batch release, storage 
conditions and shipping. It shall indicate who has been 
designated or trained as the authorised person responsible for 
the release of batches. It shall be continuously updated while at 
the same time ensuring appropriate traceability to the previous 
versions. 
9.5. Specifications- 
9.5.1. In developing specifications, special attention shall be paid 
to characteristics which affect the efficacy and safety of 
pharmaceutical products, namely- 
(a) the accuracy of the therapeutic or unitary dose, homogeneity, 
content uniformity; 
(b) the release of active ingredients from the dosage form: 
dissolution time, etc.; and 
(c) the estimated stability, if necessary, under accelerated 
conditions, the preliminary storag e conditions and the shelf -
life of the product. 
9.5.2. In addition, the package size shall be suitable for the 
requirements of the trial. 
9.5.3. Specifications may be subject to change as the development 
of the product progresses. Changes shall, however, be made in 
accordance with a written procedure and clearly recorded. 
Specifications shall be based on all available scientific data, 
current state -of-the-art technology and the regulatory and 
pharmacopoeial requirements. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
9.6. Master formulae and processing instructions- 
9.6.1. These may be changed in the light of experience, but allowance 
must be made for any possible repercussions on stability and 
above all on bioequivalence between batches of finished products. 
Changes shall be made in accordance with a written procedure 
and clearly recorded. 
9.6.2. It may sometimes not be necessary to produce master 
formulae and processing instructions, but for every 
manufacturing operation or supply there shall be clear and 
adequate written instructions and written records. Record s are 
particularly important for the preparation of the final version of 
the documents to be used in routine manufacture. 
9.7. Packaging instructions- The number of units to be packaged shall be 
specified before the start of the packaging operations. Account sh all be 
taken of the number of units necessary for carrying out quality controls 
and of the number of samples from each batch used in the clinical trial 
to be kept as a reference for further rechecking and control. 
Reconciliation shall be carried out at the end of the packaging and 
labelling process. 
9.8. Labelling instructions- 
9.8.1. The information presented on labels shall include- 
(a) the name of the sponsor; 
(b) a statement "for clinical research use only"; 
(c) a trial reference number; 
(d) a batch number; 
(e) the patient identification number; 
(f) the storage conditions; and 
(g) the expiry date (month or year) or a retest date. 
9.8.2. Additional information may be displayed in accordance with the 
order (e.g., dosing instructions, treatment period and standard 
warnings). When necessary for blinding purposes, the batch 
number may be provided separately. A copy of each type of label 
shall be kept in the batch packaging record. 
9.9. Processing and packaging batch records - Processing and packaging 
batch records shall be kept in sufficient detail for the sequ ence of 
operations to be accurately traced. They shall contain any relevant 
remarks which increase existing knowledge of the product, allow 
improvements in the manufacturing operations and justify the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
procedures used. 
9.10. Coding (or randomisation) systems- 
9.10.1. Procedures shall be established for the generation, distribution, 
handling and retention of any randomisation code used in 
packaging' investigational products. 
9.10.2. A coding system shall be introduced to permit the proper 
identification of "blinded" products. The code, together with the 
randomisation list, must permit proper identification of the 
product, including any necessary traceability to the codes and 
batch number of the product before the blind ing operation. 
The coding system must permit determination without delay in 
an emergency situation of the identity of the actual treatment 
product received by individual subjects. 

10. Production:- 
10.1. Products intended for use in clinical trials (late Phase I I and Phase 
III studies) shall as far as possible be manufactured at a licensed 
facility, namely- 
(a) a pilot plant, primarily designed and used for process development; 
(b) a small -scale facility (sometimes called a "pharmacy") separate 
both from the company's pilot plant and from routine production; 
(c) a larger-scale production line assembled to manufacture materials 
in larger batches, e.g., for late Phase III trials and first commercial 
batches; and 
(d) the normal production line used for licensed commercial batc hes, 
and sometimes for the production of investigational pharmaceutical 
products if the number, e.g., of ordered ampoules, tablets or other 
dosage forms, is large enough; 
10.1.1. The relation between the batch size for investigational 
pharmaceutical products manufactured in a pilot plant or small -
scale facility to the planned full -size batches may vary widely 
depending on the pilot plant or "pharmacy" batch size 
demanded and the capacity available in full-size production. 
10.1.2. The present guidelines are applicable to licensed facilities of the 
first and second types. It is easier to assure compliance with 
GMP in facilities of the second type, since processes are kept 
constant in the course of production and are not normally 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
changed for the purpose of process development. Facilities of 
the remaining types shall be subject to all GMP rules for 
pharmaceutical products. 
10.1.3. Administratively, the manufacturer has yet another possibility, 
namely to contract out the preparation of investigational 
products. Technically, however, the licensed facility will be 
of one of the above -mentioned types. The contract must then 
clearly state, inter alia, the use of the pharmaceutical products 
in clinical trials. Close cooperation between the contracting 
parties is essential. 
10.2. Manufacturing operations- 
10.2.1. Validated procedures may not always be available during 
the development phase, which makes it difficult to know in 
advance what critical parameters and in -process controls would 
help to control these parameters. Provisional production 
parameters and in-process controls may then usually be deduced 
from experience with analogous products. Careful consideration 
by key personnel is called for in order to formulate the 
necessary instructions and to adapt them continuously to the 
experience gained in production. 
10.2.2. For sterile investigational products, assurance of sterility 
shall be not less than for licensed products. Cleaning procedures 
shall be appropriately validated and designed in the light of the 
incomplete knowledge of the toxicity of the in vestigational 
product. Where processes such as mixing have not been 
validated, additional quality control testing may be necessary. 
10.3. Packaging and labeling- 
10.3.1. The packaging and labelling of investigational products are 
likely to be more complex and more liabl e to errors (which are 
also harder to detect) when "blinded" labels are used than for 
licensed products. Supervisory procedures such as label 
reconciliation, line clearance, etc., and the independent checks 
by quality control staff shall accordingly be intensified. 
10.3.2. The packaging must ensure that the investigational product 
remains in good condition during transport and storage at 
intermediate destinations. Any opening of or tampering with the 
outer packaging during transport shall be readily discernible. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
10.4. Blinding operations - In the preparation of "blinded" products, in -
process control shall include a check on the similarity in appearance 
and any other required characteristics of the different products being 
compared. 

11. Quality control:- 
11.1. As processes may not b e standardised or fully validated, end -product 
testing is more important in ensuring that each batch meets its 
specification. The test or analysis of materials and investigational 
products shall be in compliance to Schedule L1. 
11.2. Product release is often carried out in two stages, before and after final 
packaging- 
11.2.1. Bulk product assessment - This shall cover all relevant factors, 
including production conditions, the results of in -process 
testing, a review of manufacturing documentation and 
compliance with the product specification file and the order. 
11.2.2. Finished product assessment - This shall cover, in addition to 
the bulk product assessment, all relevant factors, including 
packaging conditions, the results of in-process testing, a review 
of packaging documentation and compliance with the product 
specification file and the order. 
11.3. When necessary, quality control shall also be used to verify the 
similarity in appearance and other physical characteristics, odour and 
taste of "blinded" investigational products. 
11.4. Samples of each batch of product shall be retained in the 
primary container used for the study or in a suitable bulk container 
for at least two years after the termination or completion of the 
relevant clinical trial. If the sample is not stored in the pack used for 
the study, stability data shall be available to justify the shelf -life in 
the pack used. Properly stored reatained sample e.g., API or drug 
substance, in -process material, phase -I investigational drug) that can 
be subsequently analy sed for comparison can provide important links 
in reproducing comparable products. 

12. Shipping, returns, and destruction:- 
12.1. The shipping, return and destruction of unused products shall be 
carried out in accordance with the written procedures laid down in the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
protocol. All unused products sent outside the manufacturing plant 
shall, as far as possible, either be returned to the manufacturer or 
destroyed in accordance with clearly defined instructions. 
12.2. Shipping- 
12.2.1. Investigational products shall be shipped in accor dance with the 
shipping orders given by the sponsor. 
12.2.2. A shipment is sent to an investigator only after the following 
two-step release procedure: - (i) the release of the product after 
quality control ("technical green light"); and (ii) the 
authorisation to u se the product, given by the sponsor 
("regulatory green light"). Both releases shall be recorded. 
12.2.3. The sponsor shall ensure that the shipment will be received and 
acknowledged by the correct addressee as stated in the protocol. 
12.2.4. A detailed inventory of the shipments made by the manufacturer 
shall be maintained and shall make particular mention of the 
addressee's identification. 
12.3. Returns- 
12.3.1. Investigational products shall be returned under agreed 
conditions defined by the sponsor, specified in written 
procedures and approved by authorised staff members. 
12.3.2. Returned investigational products shall be clearly identified and 
stored in a dedicated area. Inventory records of returned 
medicinal products shall be kept. The responsibilities of the 
investigator and the sponsor are dealt with in greater detail in 
the guidelines on GCP. 
12.4. Destruction- 
12.4.1. The sponsor is responsible for the destruction of unused 
investigational products, which shall therefore not be destroyed 
by the manufacturer without prior authorisation by the sponsor . 
Destruction operations shall be carried out in accordance with 
the environmental safety requirements. 
12.4.2. Destruction operations shall be recorded in such a manner that 
all operations are documented. The records shall be kept by the 
sponsor. 
12.4.3. If requested to destroy products, the manufacturer shall deliver 
a certificate of destruction or a receipt for destruction to the 
sponsor. These documents shall permit the batches involved to 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
be clearly identified. 

PART VIII 
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF ORAL SOLID 
DOSAGE FORMS (TABLETS AND CAPSULES) 
Note.—Good Manufacturing Practices for pharmaceutical products: Main 
principles as given in Part I shall be complied with, mutatis mutandis, for 
the manufacture of oral Solid Dosage Forms (Tablets and capsules). In 
addition to these requirements, the following specific requirements shall also 
be followed, namely:— 

1. General:- 
1.1. The processing of dry materials and products creates problems of dust 
control and cross -contamination. Special attention is, therefore, needed 
in the design, maintenance and use of premises and equipment in order 
to overcome these problems. Wherever required, enclosed dust control 
manufacturing systems shall be employed. 
1.2. Suitable environmental conditions for the products handled shall be 
maintained by installation of air conditioning, wherever necessary. 
Effective air extraction systems, with discharge points situated to avoid 
contamination of other products and processes shall be provided. Filters 
shall be installed to retain dust and to protect the factory and local 
environment. 
1.3. Special care shall be taken to protect against subsequent contamination of 
the product by particles of metal or wood. The use of metal detector is 
recommended. Wooden equipment shall be avoided. Screens, sieves, 
punches and dies shall be examined for wear and tear or for breakage 
before and after each use. 
1.4. All ingredients for a dry product shall be sifted before use unless the 
quality of the input material can be assured. Such sifting shall normally 
be carried out at dedicated areas. 
1.5. Where the facilities are designed to provide special environmental 
conditions of pressure differentials between rooms, these conditions 
shall be regularly monitored and any deviation shall be brought to the 
immediate attention of the Producti on and Quality assurance 
departments. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1.6. Care shall be taken to guard against any material lodging and remaining 
undetected in any processing or packaging equipment. Particular care 
shall be taken to ensure that any vacuum, compressed air or air -
extraction no zzles are kept clean and that there is no evidence of 
lubricants leaking into the product from any part of the equipment. 
1.7. Where different products are manufactured at the same time, in different 
areas or cubicles, in a multiproduct Oral Solid Dosage (OSD) 
manufacturing site, measures shall be taken to ensure that dust cannot 
move from one cubicle to another. 
1.8. Correct directional air movement and a pressure cascade system can 
assist in preventing cross -contamination. The pressure cascade shall be 
such that th e direction of airflow is from the clean corridor into the 
cubicles, resulting in dust containment. 
1.9. The corridor shall be maintained at a higher pressure than the cubicles, 
and the cubicles at a higher pressure than atmospheric pressure. 
1.10. Highly potent prod ucts shall be manufactured under a pressure cascade 
regime that is negative relative to atmospheric pressure. 
1.11. The pressure cascade for each facility shall be individually assessed 
according to the product handled and level of protection required. 
1.12. Building structure shall be given special attention to accommodate the 
pressure cascade design. 
1.13. Ceilings and walls, close fitting doors and sealed light fittings shall be in 
place, to limit ingress or egress of air. 
1.14. The pressure differential between adjacent rooms could be considered a 
critical parameter, depending on the outcome of risk analysis. The limits 
for the pressure differential between adjacent areas shall be such that 
there is no risk of overlap in the acceptable operating range, e.g., 5 Pa to 
15 Pa in on e room and 15 Pa to 30 Pa in an adjacent room, resulting in 
the failure of the pressure cascade, where the first room is at the 
maximum pressure limit and the second room is at its minimum pressure 
limit. 
1.15. Low pressure differentials may be acceptable when a irlocks (pressure 
sinks or pressure bubbles) are used to segregate areas. 
1.16. The effect of room pressure tolerances shall be calculated and taken into 
consideration. 
1.17. The pressure control and monitoring devices used shall be calibrated and 
qualified. Compliance with specifications shall be regularly verified and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
the results recorded. Pressure control devices shall be linked to an alarm 
system set according to the levels determined by a risk analysis. 
1.18. Manual control systems, where used, shall be set up during 
commissioning, with set point marked, and shall not change unless other 
system conditions change. 
1.19. Airlocks can be important components in setting up and maintaining 
pressure cascade systems and also to limit cross-contamination. 
1.20. Airlocks with different press ure cascade regimes include the cascade 
airlock, sink airlock and bubble airlock:- 
(a) Cascade airlock: higher pressure on one side of the airlock and 
lower pressure on the other; 
(b) Sink airlock: lower pressure inside the airlock and higher 
pressure on both outer sides; and 
(c) Bubble airlock: higher pressure inside the airlock and lower 
pressure on both outer sides. 
1.21. Doors shall open to the high pressure side, so that room pressure assists 
in holding the door closed and in addition self -closers shall be provided. 
If the doors open to the low pressure side, the door closer springs shall 
be sufficient to hold the door closed and prevent the pressure differential 
from pushing the door open. There shall be a method to indicate if both 
doors to airlocks are open at the sam e time, or alternatively these shall 
be interlocked. The determination of which doors shall be interlocked 
shall be the subject of a risk assessment study. 
1.22. Central dust extraction systems shall be interlocked with the appropriate 
air-handling systems, to ensure that they operate simultaneously. 
1.23. Room pressure differential between adjacent cubicles, which are linked 
by common dust extraction ducting, shall be avoided. 
1.24. Air shall not flow through the dust extraction ducting or return air 
ducting from the room w ith the higher pressure to the room with the 
lower pressure (this would normally occur only if extract or return 
systems were inoperative). Systems shall be designed to prevent dust 
flowing back in the opposite direction in the event of component failure 
or airflow failure. 
1.25. Adequate room pressure differential indication shall be provided so that 
each critical room pressure can be traced back to ambient pressure (by 
summation of the room pressure differentials), in order to determine the 
room actual absolute pressure. Room pressure indication gauges shall 
have a range and graduation scale which enables the reading to accuracy, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
as appropriate; normal operating range, alert and action limits shall be 
defined and displayed at the point of indication. A colour co ding gauge 
may be helpful. Room pressure indication may be either analogue or 
digital, and may be represented as either pressure differentials or 
absolute pressures. Whichever system is used any out -of-specification 
condition shall be easily identifiable. 
1.26. Material Pass -Through-Hatches (PTH) or Pass Boxes (PB) can also be 
used for separating two different zones. PTHs fall into two categories, 
namely a dynamic PTH or a passive PTH. Dynamic PTHs have an air 
supply to or extraction from them, and can then be us ed as bubble, sink 
or cascade PTHs. 
1.27. Where appropriate, temperature and relative humidity shall be controlled, 
monitored and recorded, where relevant, to ensure compliance with 
requirements pertinent to the materials and products and provide a 
comfortable environment for the operator where necessary. 
1.28. Maximum and minimum room temperatures and relative humidity shall 
be appropriate. Alert and action limits on temperatures and humidity 
shall be set, as appropriate. 
1.29. The operating band or tolerance between the ac ceptable minimum and 
maximum temperatures shall not be made too close. Tight control 
tolerances may be difficult to achieve and can also add unnecessary 
installation and running costs. 
1.30. Cubicles or suites, in which products requiring low relative humidity a re 
processed, shall have well sealed walls and ceilings and shall also be 
separated from adjacent areas with higher relative humidity by means of 
suitable airlocks. 
1.31. Precautions shall be taken to prevent moisture migration that increases 
the load on the HVAC system. 
1.32. Humidity control shall be achieved by removing moisture from the air, or 
adding moisture to the air, as relevant. 
1.33. Dehumidification (moisture removal) may be achieved by means of 
either refrigerated dehumidifiers or chemical dehumidifiers. 
1.34. Duct material in the vicinity of the humidifier shall not add contaminants 
to air that will not be removed by filtration further downstream. 
1.35. Air filters shall not be installed immediately downstream of humidifiers, 
as moisture on the filters could lead to bacterial growth. 
1.36. Cold surfaces shall be insulated to prevent condensation within the clean 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
area or on air-handling components. 
1.37. When specifying relative humidity, the associated temperature shall also 
be specified. 
1.38. Chemical driers using silica gel or lithium chlo ride are acceptable, 
provided that they do not become sources of contamination. 
1.39. Wherever possible, dust or vapour contamination shall be removed at 
source. Point -of-use extraction, i.e., as close as possible to the point 
where the dust is generated, shall be employed. Spot ventilation or 
capture hoods may be used as appropriate. 
1.40. Point-of-use extraction shall be either in the form of a fixed high velocity 
extraction point or an articulated arm with movable hood or a fixed 
extraction hood. 
1.41. Dust extraction ducting shall be designed with sufficient transfer velocity 
to ensure that dust is carried away and does not settle in the ducting. 
Periodic checks shall be performed to ensure that there is no build -up of 
the dust in the ducting. 
1.42. The required transfer veloci ty shall be determined on the density of the 
dust (the denser the dust, the higher the transfer velocity shall be, e.g., 
15–20 m/s). 
1.43. Airflow direction shall be carefully chosen to ensure that the operator 
does not contaminate the product and also so that t he operator is not put 
at risk by the product. 
1.44. Point extraction alone is usually not sufficient to capture all of the 
contaminants, and general directional airflow shall be used to assist in 
removing dust and vapours from the room. 
1.45. Typically, in a room ope rating with turbulent airflow, the air shall be 
introduced from ceiling diffusers, located at the door entry side of the 
room and extracted from the rear of the room at low level to help give a 
flushing effect in the room. Correct flushing of the rooms may be 
verified by airflow visualisation smoke tests. 
1.46. When dealing with particularly harmful products, additional steps, such 
as handling the products in glove boxes or using barrier isolator 
technology, shall be used. 
1.47. Exhaust air discharge points on pharmace utical equipment and facilities, 
such as from fluid bed driers and tablet -coating equipment, and exhaust 
air from dust extraction systems, carry heavy dust loads and shall be 
provided with adequate filtration to prevent contamination of the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
ambient air. 
1.48. Where the powders are not highly potent, final filters on a dust exhaust 
system shall be fine dust filters with a filter classification of 5µ. 
1.49. Where reverse-pulse dust collectors are used for removing dust from dust 
extraction systems, they shall usually be equipped with cartridge filters 
containing a compressed air lance, and be capable of continuous 
operation without interrupting the airflow. 
1.50. Mechanical-shaker dust collectors shall not be used for applications 
where continuous airflow is required, in order to avoid unacceptable 
fluctuations in room pressures, except in the case where room pressures 
are automatically controlled. 
1.51. When wet scrubbers are used, the dust -slurry shall be removed by a 
suitable means, e.g., a drainage system or waste removal contractor. 
1.52. The quality of the exhaust air shall be determined to see whether the 
filtration efficiency is adequate with all types of dust collectors and wet 
scrubbers. 
1.53. Where necessary, additional filtration may be provided downstream of 
the dust collector. 
1.54. The sy stems for fume, dust and effluent control shall be designed, 
installed and operated in such a manner that they do not become possible 
sources of contamination or cross -contamination, e.g., an exhaust -air 
discharge point located close to the HVAC system fresh air inlet. 
1.55. Fumes shall be removed by means of wet scrubbers or dry chemical 
scrubbers (deep-bed scrubbers). 
1.56. Wet scrubbers for fume removal normally require the addition of various 
chemicals to the water to increase the adsorption efficiency. 
1.57. Deep-bed sc rubbers shall be designed with activated carbon filters or 
granular chemical adsorption media. The chemical media for deep -bed 
scrubbers shall be specific to the effluent being treated. 
1.58. The type and quantity of the vapours to be removed shall be known to 
enable the appropriate filter media, as well as the volume of media 
required to be determined. 
1.59. There shall be no risk of contamination or cross-contamination (including 
by fumes and volatiles) due to recirculation of air. 
1.60. Depending on the airborne contamina nts in the return air system it may 
be acceptable to use re -circulated air, provided that HEPA filters are 
installed in the supply air stream to remove contaminants and thus, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
prevent cross-contamination. 
1.61. HEPA filters may not be required where the air handl ing system is 
serving a single product facility and there is evidence that cross -
contamination would not be possible. 
1.62. Re-circulation of air from areas where pharmaceutical dust is not 
generated such as secondary packing may not require HEPA filters in 
the system. 
1.63. HEPA filters may be located in the air handling unit or placed terminally. 
Where HEPA filters are terminally mounted they shall preferably not be 
connected to the ducting by means of flexible ducting. Due to the high 
air pressure required for the t erminal filter; this connection shall 
preferably be a rigid duct connection. Where flexible ducting is used, it 
shall be as short as possible and properly fixed to withstand duct 
pressure. 
1.64. Air containing dust from highly toxic processes or solvents or flam mable 
vapours shall never be re-circulated to the HVAC system. 
1.65. Adequate airlocks, such as personnel airlocks (PAL), material airlocks 
(MAL), change rooms and passages shall be provided to protect passage 
between different cleanliness conditions. These shal l have supply and 
extract air systems as appropriate. 
1.66. Areas such as airlocks, change rooms and passages, shall be designed so 
that the required pressure cascades can be achieved. 
1.67. Detailed diagrams depicting pressure cascades, air flow directions and 
flow r outes for personnel and materials shall be prepared and 
maintained. 
1.68. Where possible, personnel and materials shall not move from a higher 
cleanliness zone to a lower cleanliness zone and back to a higher 
cleanliness zone; (if moving from a lower cleanliness zone to a higher 
cleanliness zone, changing or decontamination procedures shall be 
followed). 
1.69. The final stage of the changing room shall, in the “at rest” state, be the 
same good manufacturing practices classification grade as the area into 
which it leads. 

2. Sifting, mixing and granulation:- 
2.1. Unless operated as a closed system, mixing, sifting and blending 
equipment shall be fitted with dust extractors or in a dedicated area for 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
each operation. 
2.2. Residues from sieving operations shall be examined periodically for 
evidence of the presence of unwanted materials. 
2.3. Critical operating parameters like time and temperature for each mixing, 
blending and drying operation shall be specified in a Master Formula, 
monitored during processing, and recorded in the batch records. 
2.4. Filter bags fitted to fluid -bed-drier shall not be used for different 
products, without being washed in between use. With certain highly 
potent or sensitising products, bags specific to one product only shall be 
used. Air entering the drier shall be fi ltered. Steps shall be taken to 
prevent contamination of the site and local environment by dust in the 
air leaving the drier due to close positioning of the air-inlets and exhaust. 
2.5. Granulation and coating solutions shall be made, stored and used in a 
manner which minimises the risk of contamination or microbial growth. 

3. Compression (Tablets):- 
3.1. Each tablet compressing machine shall be provided with effective dust 
control facilities to avoid cross contamination. Unless the same product 
is being made on each m achine or unless the compression machine itself 
provides its own enclosed air controlled environment, the machine shall 
be installed in separate cubicles. 
3.2. Suitable physical, procedural and labelling arrangements shall be made to 
prevent mix up of materials , granules and tablets on compression 
machinery. 
3.3. Accurate and calibrated weighing equipment shall be readily available 
and used for in-process monitoring of tablet weight variation. Procedures 
used shall be capable of detecting out of limits tablets. 
3.4. At the commencement of each compression run and in case of multiple 
compression points in a compression machine, sufficient individual 
tablets shall be examined at fixed intervals to ensure that a tablet from 
each compression station or from each compression p oint has been 
inspected for suitable Pharmacopoeial parameters like “appearance”, 
“weight variation”, “disintegration”, “hardness”, “friability” and 
“thickness”. The results shall be recorded as part of the batch 
documentation. 
3.5. Tablets shall be de -dusted, preferably by automatic device and shall be 
monitored for the presence of foreign materials besides any other 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
defects. 
3.6. Tablets shall be collected into clean, labelled containers. 
3.7. Rejected or discarded tablets shall be isolated in identified containers and 
their quantity recorded in the Batch Manufacturing Record. 
3.8. In-process control shall be employed to ensure that the products remain 
within specification. During compression, samples of tablets shall be 
taken at regular intervals of not greater than thirty minutes to ensure that 
they are being produced in compliance with specified in -process 
specification. The tablets shall also be periodically checked for 
additional parameters such as “appearance”, “weight variation”, 
“disintegration”, “hardness”, “friabil ity” and “thickness” and 
contamination by lubricating oil. 

4. Coating (Tablets):- 
4.1. Air supplied to coating pans for drying purposes shall be filtered air and 
of suitable quality. The area shall be provided with suitable exhaust 
system and environmental control (temperature and humidity) measures. 
4.2. Coating solutions and suspensions shall be made afresh and used in a 
manner which shall minimise the risk of microbial growth. Their 
preparation and use shall be documented and recorded. 

5. Filling of Hard Gelatin Caps ule:- Empty capsules shells shall be regarded 
as “drug component” and treated accordingly. They shall be stored under 
conditions which shall ensure their safety from the effects of excessive heat 
and moisture 

6. Printing (Tablets and Capsules):- 
6.1. Special care shall be taken to avoid product mix -up during any printing 
of tablets and capsules. Where different products or different batches of 
the same product, are printed simultaneously, the operations shall 
adequately be segregated. Edible grade colours and su itable printing ink 
shall be used for such printing. 
6.2. After printing, tablets and capsules shall be approved by Quality Control 
before release for packaging or sale. 

7. Packaging (Strip and Blister):- 
7.1. Care shall be taken when using automatic tablet and capsul e counting, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
strip and blister packaging equipment to ensure that all “rogue” tablets, 
capsules or foils from packaging operation are removed before a new 
packaging operation is commenced. There shall be an independent 
recorded check of the equipment before a new batch of tablets or 
capsules is handled. 
7.2. Uncoated tablets shall be packed on equipment designed to minimise the 
risk of cross -contamination. Such packaging shall be carried out in an 
isolated area when potent tablets or Beta lactum containing tablet s are 
being packed. 
7.3. The strips coming out of the machine shall be inspected for defects such 
as misprint, cuts on the foil, missing tablets and improper sealing. 
7.4. Integrity of individual packaging strips and blisters shall be subjected to 
vacuum test period ically to ensure leak proofness of each pocket strip 
and blister and records maintained. 

PART IX 
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF ORAL 
LIQUIDS (SYRUPS, ELIXIRS, EMULSIONS AND SUSPENSIONS) 

Note.- Good Manufacturing Practices for pharmaceutical pro ducts: Main 
principles as given in Part I shall be complied with, mutatis mutandis, for 
the manufacture of Syrups, Elixirs, Emulsions and Suspensions. In 
addition to these requirements, the following specific requirements shall 
also be followed, namely:- 
1. Principle:- Syrups, Elixirs, Emulsions and Suspensions may be 
susceptible to microbial and other contamination during manufacture. 
Therefore, special measures must be taken to prevent any contamination. 

2. Building and Equipment:- 
2.1. The premises and equipment s hall be designed, constructed and 
maintained to suit the manufacturing of Oral Liquids. The layout and 
design of the manufacturing area shall strive to minimise the risk of 
cross-contamination and mix-ups. 
2.2. The use of closed systems of processing and transfer is recommended 
in order to protect the product from contamination. Production areas 
where the products or open clean containers are exposed shall 
normally be effectively ventilated with filtered air. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2.3. Manufacturing area shall have entry through double d oor air -lock 
facility. It shall be made fly proof by use of ‘fly catcher’ or ‘air 
curtain’. 
2.4. Drainage shall be of adequate size and have adequate traps, without 
open channels and the design shall be such as to prevent back flow. 
Drains shall be shallow to facilitate cleaning and disinfecting. 
2.5. The production area shall be cleaned and sanitised at the end of every 
production process. 
2.6. Tanks, containers, pipe work and pumps shall be designed and 
installed so that they can be easily cleaned and sanitised. Equip ment 
design shall be to prevent accumulation of residual microbial growth 
or cross-contamination. 
2.7. Stainless Steel or any other appropriate material shall be used for 
parts of equipments coming in direct contact with the products. The 
use of glass apparatus shall be minimum. 
2.8. Arrangements for cleaning of containers, closures and droppers shall 
be made with the help of suitable machines or devices equipped with 
high pressure air, water and steam jets. 
2.9. The quality of materials received in bulk tankers shall b e checked 
before they are transferred to bulk storage tanks. 
2.10. Care shall be taken when transferring materials via pipelines to 
ensure that they are delivered to their correct destination. 
2.11. The furniture used shall be smooth, washable and made of 
stainless s teel or any other appropriate material which is scratch 
proof, washable and smooth. 

3. Purified Water:- 
3.1. The chemical and microbiological quality of purified water used shall 
be specified and monitored routinely. The microbiological evaluation 
shall include testing for absence of pathogens and shall not exceed 
100 cfu per ml. 
3.2. There shall be a written procedure for operation and maintenance of 
the purified water system. Care shall be taken to avoid the risk of 
microbial proliferation with appropriate methods like recirculation, 
use of Ultra Violet (UV) treatment, treatment with heat and sanitising 
agent. After any chemical sanitisation of the water system, a flushing 
shall be done to ensure that the sanitising agent has been effectively 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
removed. 

4. Manufacturing:- 
4.1. Manufacturing personnel shall wear wherever required non fibre 
shedding clothing to prevent contamination of the product. 
4.2. Materials likely to shed fibre like gunny bags, or wooden pallets shall 
not be carried into the area where products or cleaned co ntainers are 
exposed. 
4.3. Care shall be taken to maintain the homogeneity of emulsion by use of 
appropriate emulsifier and suspensions by use of appropriate stirrer 
during filling. Mixing and filling processes shall be specified and 
monitored. Special care sha ll be taken at the beginning of the filling 
process after stoppage due to any interruption and at the end of the 
process to ensure that the product is uniformly homogenous during the 
filling process. 
4.4. The primary packaging area shall have an air supply whic h is filtered 
through level -3 filters [P roduction facility operating on re-circulated 
plus ambient ai r, whe re potential for c ross-contamination exists: 
Primary plus seconda ry plus te rtiary filters (e.g., EN779 G4 plus F8 
plus EN1822 H13 filters) (for full fresh air system, without 
recirculation, G4 and F8 or F9 filters a re acceptable]. The temperature 
of the area shall not exceed 30 degrees centigrade. 
4.5. When the bulk product is not immediately packed, the maximum 
period of storage and storage conditions sha ll be specified in the 
Master Formula. The maximum period of storage time of a product in 
the bulk stage shall be validated. 

PART X 
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF TOPICAL 
PRODUCTS i.e., EXTERNAL PREPARATIONS (CREAMS, 
OINTMENTS, PASTES, MULSIONS, LOTIONS, SOLUTIONS, 
DUSTING POWDERS AND IDENTICAL PRODUCTS) 

Note.- Good Manufacturing Practices for pharmaceutical products: Main 
principles as given in Part I shall be complied with, mutatis mutandis, for 
the manufacture of Topical Products i.e. , External Preparations (Creams, 
Ointments, Pastes, Emulsions, Lotions, Solutions, Dusting powders and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
identical products used for external applications). In addition to these 
requirements, the following specific requirements shall also be followed, 
namely:— 
(1) The entrance to the area where topical products are manufactured 
shall be through a suitable airlock. Outside the airlock, insectocutors 
shall be installed. 
(2) The air to this manufacturing area shall be filtered through suitable 
filters and shall be air -conditioned. The HVAC system shall be in 
place. 
(3) The area shall be fitted with an exhaust system of suitable capacity to 
effectively remove vapours, fumes, smoke or floating dust particles. 
(4) The equipment used shall be designed and maintained to prevent the 
product from being accidentally contaminated with any foreign 
matter or lubricant. 
(5) Suitable cleaning equipment and material shall be used in the process 
of cleaning or drying the process equipment or accessories used. 
(6) Water used in compounding shall be Purified Water IP. 
(7) Powders, whenever used, shall be suitably sieved before use. 
(8) Heating vehicles and a base like petroleum jelly shall be done in a 
separate mixing area in suitable stainless steel vessels, using steam, 
gas, electricity, solar energy, etc. 
(9) A separate packing section may be provided for primary packaging of 
the products. 
For p roduction facility operating on re-circulated plus ambient ai r, where 
potential for c ross-contamination exists: Prima ry plus seconda ry plus 
tertiary filters (e.g., EN779 G4 plus F8 plus EN1822 H13 filters) (for full 
fresh air system, without recirculation, G4 and F8 or F9 filters a re 
acceptable). 
PART XI 
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF METERED–
DOSE– INHALERS (MDI) 
Note.– The Good Manufacturing Practices for pharm aceutical products: 
Main principles as given in Part I shall be complied with, mutatis 
mutandis, for the manufacture of Metered -Dose-Inhalers (MDI). In 
addition to these requirements, the following specific requirements shall 
also be followed, namely:— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1. Principle:- Manufacture of pressurised aerosol products for inhalation with 
metering valves requires some special provisions arising from the particular 
nature of this pharmaceutical form. It shall occur under conditions which 
minimise microbial and particula te contamination. Assurance of the quality 
of the valve components and in the case of suspensions, of uniformity is also 
of particular importance. There are presently two common manufacturing 
and filling methods as follows:– 
(a) Two-shot system (pressure filli ng). The active ingredient is 
suspended in a high boiling point propellant, the dose is filled into the 
container, the valve is crimped on and the lower boiling point 
propellant is injected through the valve stem to make up the finished 
product. The suspension of active ingredient in propellant is kept cool 
to reduce evaporation loss. 
(b) One-shot process (cold filling). The active ingredient is suspended in 
a mixture of propellants and held either under high pressure or at a 
low temperature or both. The suspe nsion is then filled directly into 
the container in one shot. 

2. General:- Manufacture of Metered -Dose-Inhalers shall be done under 
conditions which shall ensure minimum microbial and particulate 
contamination. Assurance of the quality of components and the bulk product 
is very important. Where medicaments are in suspended state, uniformity of 
suspension shall be established. Manufacture and filling shall be carried out 
as far as possible in a closed system. 

3. Building and civil works:- 
3.1. The building shall be located on a solid foundation to reduce risk of 
cracking walls and floor due to the movement of equipment and 
machinery. 
3.2. All building surfaces shall be impervious, smooth and non -shedding. 
Flooring shall be continuous and provided with a cover between the 
floor and the wall as well as between the wall and the ceiling. Ceiling 
shall be solid, continuous and proceeded a cone with the walls. Light 
fittings and air -grills shall be flush with the ceiling. All service lines 
requiring maintenance shall be erected in such a manner that these are 
accessible from outside the production area. 
3.3. The manufacturing area shall be segregated into change rooms for 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
personnel, container preparation area, bulk preparation and filling area, 
quarantine area and spray testing and packing areas. 
3.4. Secondary change rooms shall be provided for operators to change from 
factory clothing to special departmental clothing before entering the 
manufacturing and filling area. 
3.5. Separate area shall be provided for de -cartooning of components befo re 
they are air washed. 
3.6. The propellants used for manufacture shall be delivered to the 
manufacturing area distribution system by filtering them through 2µ 
filters. The bulk containers of propellants shall be stored, suitably 
identified, away from the manufacturing facilities. 

4. Environmental conditions:- 
4.1. Where products or clean components are exposed, the area shall be 
supplied with filtered air of Grade C and personnel shall be entered 
through airlocks. 
4.2. The requirements of temperature and humidity in the manufacturing area 
shall be decided depending on the type of product and propellants 
handled in the facility. Other support areas shall have comfort levels of 
temperature and humidity. 
4.3. There shall be a difference in room pressure between the manufacturing 
area and the support areas and the differential pressure shall be not less 
than 15 Pascals, (0.06 inches or 1.5 mm water gauge). 
4.4. There shall be a written schedule for the monitoring of environmental 
conditions. Temperature and humidity shall be monitored daily. 
4.5. The HVAC system shall be in place. 

5. Garments:- 
5.1. Personnel in the manufacturing and filling section shall wear suitable 
single piece garment made out of non -shedding, tight weave material. 
Personnel in support areas shall wear clean factory uniforms. 
5.2. Gloves made of suitable material having no interaction with the 
propellants shall be used by the operators in the manufacturing and 
filling areas. Preferably, disposable gloves shall be used. 
5.3. Suitable department specific PPE like footwear and safety glasses shall 
be used, wherever hazard exists. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6. Sanitation:- 
6.1. There shall be written procedures for the sanitation of the MDI 
manufacturing facility. Special care shall be taken to handle residues and 
rinses of propellants. 
6.2. Use of water for cleaning shall be rest ricted and controlled. Routinely 
used disinfectants are suitable for sanitising the different areas. Records 
of sanitation shall be maintained. 

7. Equipment:- 
7.1. Manufacturing equipment shall be of closed system. The vessels and 
supply lines shall be of stainless steel. 
7.2. Suitable check weights, spray testing machines and labelling machines 
shall be provided in the department. 
7.3. All the equipment shall be suitably calibrated and their performance 
validated on receipt and thereafter periodically. 

8. Manufacture:- 
8.1. Metering valves for aerosols are a more complex engineering article than 
most pharmaceutical components. Specifications, sampling and testing 
shall be appropriate for this situation. Auditing the Quality Assurance 
system of the valve manufacturer is of particular importance. 
8.2. All propellants (e.g., liquid or gaseous propellants) shall be filtered to 
remove particles greater than 0.2µ. An additional filtration where 
possible immediately before filling is desirable. 
8.3. There shall be an approved Master Formula Reco rds for the manufacture 
of metered dose inhalers. 
8.4. The primary packing material shall be appropriately cleaned by 
compressed air suitably filtered through 0.2µ filter. The humidity of the 
compressed air shall be controlled as applicable. 
8.5. The valves shall be carefully handled and after de -cartooning, these shall 
be kept in clean, closed containers in the filling room. 
8.6. Containers and valves shall be cleaned using a validated procedure 
appropriate to the use of the product to ensure the absence of any 
contaminants such as fabrication aids (e.g., lubricants) or undue 
microbiological contaminants. After cleaning valves shall be kept in 
clean, closed containers and precautions taken not to introduce 
contamination during subsequent handling, e.g., taking samples. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Containers shall be provided to the filling line in a clean condition or 
cleaned on line immediately before filling. 
8.7. For suspensions, the bulk shall be kept stirred continuously. Precautions 
shall be taken to ensure uniformity of suspensions at the point of fill 
throughout the filling process. 
8.8. In-process controls shall include periodical checking of weight of bulk 
formulation filled in the containers. In a two -shot-filling process (liquid 
filling followed by gaseous filling), it shall be ensured that one hun dred 
per cent check on weight is carried out. 
8.9. Controls after filling shall ensure the absence of undue leakage. Any 
leakage test shall be performed in a way which avoids microbial 
contamination or residual moisture. 
8.10. Filled containers shall be quarantined for a suitable period established by 
the manufacturer to detect leaking containers prior to testing, labelling 
and packing. 

9. Documentation:- In a ddition to the routine good manufacturing practices 
documentation, manufacturing records shall show the followi ng additional 
information:– 
(1) temperature and humidity in the manufacturing area; 
(2) periodic filled weights of the formulation; 
(3) records of rejections during on line check weighing; and 
(4) records of rejection during spray testing. 

PART XII 
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURE OF ACTIVE 
PHARMACEUTICAL INGREDIENTS 
Note.— Good Manufacturing Practices for pharmaceutical products: Main 
principles as given in Part I shall be complied for the manufacture of API. 
In addition to these requirements, the following specific requirements shall 
also be followed, namely:— 

1. Introduction:- 
1.1. General- This document is intended to provide guidance regarding 
GMP for the manufacturing of APIs under an appropriate system for 
managing quality. It is also intended to help and ensure that APIs meet 
the requirements for quality and purity that they purport or are 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
represented to possess. In this Part “manufacturing” is deﬁned to 
include all operations of receipt of materials, production, packaging, 
repackaging, labelling, relabelling, quality control, release, storage and 
distribution of APIs and the related controls. 
1.2. Scope- 
1.2.1. This Part applies to the manufacture of APIs for use in Finished 
Pharmaceutical Products (FPPs). It applies to the manufacture of 
sterile APIs only up to the point immediat ely prior to the APIs 
being rendered sterile. The sterilisation and aseptic processing of 
sterile APIs are not covered by this Part, but shall be performed in 
accordance with GMP guidelines for sterile products. 
1.2.2. This Part covers APIs that are manufactured by chemical 
synthesis, extraction, cell culture or fermentation by recovery 
from natural sources or by any combination of these processes. 
1.2.3. Speciﬁc guidance for APIs manufactured by cell culture or 
fermentation is described in paragraph 17 of this Part. 
1.2.4. This Part excludes all vaccines, whole cells, whole blood and 
plasma, blood and plasma derivatives (plasma fractionation), and 
gene therapy APIs. However, it includes APIs that are produced 
using blood or plasma as raw materials. Note that cell substrates 
(mammalian, plant, insect or microbial cells, tissue or animal 
sources including transgenic animals) and early process steps may 
be subject to GMP but are not covered by this Part. In addition, 
this Part does not apply to medical gases, bulk -packaged FPPs, 
and manufacturing and control aspects speciﬁc to 
radiopharmaceuticals. 
1.2.5. Paragraph 18 contains guidance that only applies to the 
manufacture of APIs used in the production of FPPs speciﬁcally 
for clinical trials (investigational medicinal products). 
1.2.6. An “API st arting material” is a raw material, intermediate or an 
API that is used in the production of an API and that is 
incorporated as a signiﬁcant structural fragment into the structure 
of the API. An API starting material can be an article of 
commerce, a materi al purchased from one or more suppliers 
under contract or commercial agreement or produced in house. 
1.2.7. API starting materials normally have deﬁned chemical properties 
and structure. The company shall designate and document the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
rationale for the point at whic h production of the API begins. For 
synthetic processes, this is known as the point at which “API 
starting materials” are entered into the process. For other 
processes (e.g. fermentation, extraction or puriﬁcation) this 
rationale shall be established on a case-to-case basis. 
1.2.8. Table specified in paragraph 1.2.9. provides guidance on the point 
at which the API starting material is normally introduced into the 
process. From this point on, appropriate GMP as deﬁned in this 
Part shall be applied to these intermed iate or API manufacturing 
steps. This would include the validation of critical process steps 
determined to impact the quality of the API. However, it shall be 
noted that the fact that a company chooses to validate a process 
step does not necessarily deﬁne that step as critical. 
1.2.9. The guidance in this Part would normally be applied to the steps 
shown in grey in Table below. It does not imply that all steps 
shown shall be completed. The stringency of GMP in API 
manufacturing shall increase as the process procee ds from early 
API steps to ﬁnal steps, puriﬁcation and packaging. Physical 
processing of APIs, such as granulation, coating or physical 
manipulation of particle size (e.g., milling and micronising), shall 
be conducted at least to the standards of this Part. 

TABLE 
 APPLICATION OF THIS GUIDE TO API MANUFACTURING 
 Type of 
manufacturin
g 
Application of this guide to steps (shown in grey) used in 
this type of manufacturing 
Chemical 
manufacturing 
Production of 
the API 
starting 
material 
Introduction 
of the API 
starting 
material into 
process 
Production 
of 
intermediat
es 
Isolation 
and 
puriﬁcatio
n 
Physical 
processing 
and 
packaging 
API derived 
from animal 
sources 
Collection of 
organ, ﬂuid or 
tissue 
Cutting, 
mixing or 
initial 
processing 
Introductio
n of the 
API 
starting 
Isolation 
and 
puriﬁcatio
n 
Physical 
processing 
and 
packaging 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
material 
into process 
API extracted 
from plant 
sources 
Collection of 
plants 
Cutting and 
initial 
extraction 
Introductio
n of the 
API 
starting 
material 
into process 
Isolation 
and 
puriﬁcatio
n 
Physical 
processing 
and 
packaging 
phytopharmac
eutical 
extracts used 
as API 
Collection of 
plants 
Cutting and 
initial 
extraction 
 Further 
extraction 
Physical 
processing 
and 
packaging 
API consisting 
of 
comminuted 
or powdered 
herbs 
Collection of 
plants or 
cultivation 
and 
harvesting 
Cutting or 
comminutin
g 

Physical 
processing 
and 
packaging 
Biotechnology
: fermentation 
or cell culture 
Establishment 
of master cell 
bank and 
working cell 
bank 
Maintenance 
of working 
cell bank 
Cell culture 
or 
fermentatio
n 
Isolation 
and 
puriﬁcatio
n 
Physical 
processing 
and 
packaging 
“Classical” 
fermentation 
to produce an 
API 
Establishment 
of cell bank 
Maintenance 
of the cell 
bank 
Introductio
n of the 
cells into 
fermentatio
n 
Isolation 
and 
puriﬁcatio
n 
Physical 
processing 
and 
packaging 

1.2.10. This Part shall not apply to steps prior to the introduction of the 
deﬁned “API starting material”. 

2. Quality management:- 
2.1. Principles- 
2.1.1. Quality shall be the responsibility of all persons involved in the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
manufacturing. 
2.1.2. Each manufacturer shall establish, document and implement an 
effective system for managing quality that involves the active 
participation of management and appropriate manufacturing 
personnel. 
2.1.3. The system for managing quality shall encompass the 
organisational structure, procedures, processes and res ources, as 
well as activities necessary to ensure conﬁdence that the API will 
meet its intended speciﬁcations for quality and purity. All quality 
related activities shall be deﬁned and documented. 
2.1.4. There shall be a quality units that is independent of produ ction 
and that fulﬁls both quality assurance (QA) and quality control 
(QC) responsibilities. This can be in the form of separate QA and 
QC units or a single individual or group, depending upon the size 
and structure of the organisation. 
2.1.5. The persons authorised to release intermediates and APIs shall be 
speciﬁed. 
2.1.6. All quality related activities shall be recorded at the time they are 
performed. 
2.1.7. Any deviation from established procedures shall be documented 
and explained. Critical deviations shall be investigated and the 
investigation and its conclusions shall be documented. 
2.1.8. No materials shall be released or used before the satisfactory 
completion of evaluation by the quality units unless there are 
appropriate systems in place to allow for such use (e.g., release 
under quarantine as described in paragraph 10.2 of this Part or the 
use of raw materials or intermediates pending completion of 
evaluation). 
2.1.9. Procedures shall exist for notifying responsible management in a 
timely manner of regulatory inspections, serious G MP 
deﬁciencies, product defects and related actions (e.g., quality 
related complaints, recalls and regulatory actions). 
2.2. Responsibilities of the quality units- 
2.2.1. The quality units shall be involved in all quality-related matters. 
2.2.2. The quality units shall review and approve all appropriate quality 
related documents. 
2.2.3. The main responsibilities of the independent quality units shall 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
not be delegated. These responsibilities shall be described in 
writing and shall include but not necessarily be limited to:— 
(i) releasing or rejecting all APIs. Releasing or rejecting 
intermediates for use outside the control of the 
manufacturing company; 
(ii) establishing a system to release or reject raw materials, 
intermediates, packaging and labelling materials; 
(iii) reviewing completed batch pro duction and laboratory 
control records of critical process steps before release of the 
API for distribution; 
(iv) making sure that critical deviations are investigated and 
resolved; 
(v) approving all speciﬁcations and master production 
instructions; 
(vi) approving all p rocedures impacting the quality of 
intermediates or APIs; 
(vii) making sure that internal audits (self -inspections) are 
performed; 
(viii) approving intermediate and API contract manufacturers; 
(ix) approving changes that potentially impact quality of 
intermediates or APIs; 
(x) reviewing and approving validation protocols and reports; 
(xi) making sure that quality related complaints are investigated 
and resolved; 
(xii) making sure that effective systems are used for maintaining 
and calibrating critical equipment; 
(xiii) making sure that materials are appropriately tested and the 
results are reported; 
(xiv) making sure that there are stability data to support retest or 
expiry dates and storage conditions on APIs or intermediates 
where appropriate; and 
(xv) performing product quality reviews as deﬁned in paragr aph 
2.5. 
2.3. Responsibility for production activities - The responsibility for 
production activities shall be described in writing and shall include but 
not necessarily be limited to:- 
(i) preparing, reviewing, approving and distributing the instructions for 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
the pr oduction of intermediates or APIs according to written 
procedures; 
(ii) producing APIs and, when appropriate, intermediates according to 
pre-approved instructions; 
(iii) reviewing all production batch records and ensuring that these are 
completed and signed; 
(iv) making s ure that all production deviations are reported and 
evaluated and that critical deviations are investigated and the 
conclusions are recorded; 
(v) making sure that production facilities are clean and when 
appropriate disinfected; 
(vi) making sure that the necessary calibrations are performed and 
records are kept; 
(vii) making sure that the premises and equipment are maintained and 
records are kept; 
(viii) making sure that validation protocols and reports are reviewed and 
approved; 
(ix) evaluating proposed changes in product, process or equipment; and 
(x) making sure that new and when appropriate, modiﬁed facilities and 
equipment are qualiﬁed. 
2.4. Internal audits (self-inspection)- 
2.4.1. In order to verify compliance with the principles of GMP for 
APIs, regular internal audits shall be performed in a ccordance 
with an approved schedule. 
2.4.2. Audit ﬁndings and corrective actions shall be documented and 
brought to the attention of the responsible management of the 
ﬁrm. Agreed corrective actions shall be completed in a timely 
and effective manner. 
2.5. Product quality review- 
2.5.1. Regular quality reviews of APIs shall be conducted with the 
objective of verifying the consistency of the process. Such 
reviews shall normally be conducted and documented annually 
and shall include at least a review of:— 
(i) critical in-process control and critical API test results; 
(ii) all batches that failed to meet established speciﬁcations; 
(iii) all critical deviations or non -conformances and related 
investigations; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(iv) any changes carried out to the processes or analytical 
methods; 
(v) results of the stability monitoring programme; 
(vi) quality-related returns, complaints and recalls; and 
(vii) adequacy of corrective actions. 
2.5.2. The results of this review shall be evaluated and an assessment 
made of whether corrective action or any revalidation shall be 
undertaken. Reasons for such corrective action shall be 
documented. Agreed corrective actions shall be completed in a 
timely and effective manner. 

3. Personnel- 
3.1. Personnel qualiﬁcations- 
3.1.1. There shall be an adequate number of personnel qualiﬁed by 
appropriate education, training or experience to perform and 
supervise the manufacture of intermediates and APIs. 
3.1.2. The responsibilities of all personnel engaged in the manuf acture 
of intermediates and APIs shall be speciﬁed in writing. 
3.1.3. Training shall be regularly conducted by qualiﬁed individuals and 
shall cover, at a minimum, the particular operations that the 
employee performs and GMP as it relates to the employees’ 
functions. Records of training shall be maintained. Training shall 
be periodically assessed. 
3.2. Personnel hygiene- 
3.2.1. Personnel shall practice good sanitation and health habits. 
3.2.2. Personnel shall wear clean clothing suitable for the 
manufacturing activity with which they are involved and this 
clothing shall be changed when appropriate. Additional 
protective apparel, such as head, face, hand and arm coverings 
shall be worn when necessary to protect intermediates and APIs 
from contamination. 
3.2.3. Personnel shall avoid direct contact with intermediates or APIs. 
3.2.4. 3.2.4 Smoking, eating, drinking, chewing and the storage of 
food shall be restricted to certain designated areas separate from 
the manufacturing areas. 
3.2.5. Personnel with an infectious disease or who have open lesions 
on the exposed surface of the body shall not engage in activities 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
that could result in compromising the quality of APIs. Any 
person shown at any time (either by medical examination or 
supervisory observation) to have an apparent illness or open 
lesions shall be exc luded from activities where their health 
condition could adversely affect the quality of the APIs, until the 
condition is corrected or qualiﬁed medical personnel determine 
that the person’s inclusion would not jeopardise the safety or 
quality of the APIs. 
3.3. Consultants- 
3.3.1. Consultants advising on the manufacture and control of 
intermediates or APIs shall have sufﬁcient education, training 
and experience or any combination thereof to advise on the 
subject for which they are retained. 
3.3.2. Records shall be maintained s tating the name, address, 
qualiﬁcations and type of service provided by these consultants. 

4. Buildings and facilities- 
4.1. Design and construction- 
4.1.1. Buildings and facilities used in the manufacture of intermediates 
and APIs shall be located, designed and constru cted to facilitate 
cleaning, maintenance and operations as appropriate to the type 
and stage of manufacture. Facilities shall also be designed to 
minimise potential contamination. Where microbiological 
speciﬁcations have been established for the intermedia te or API, 
facilities shall also be designed to limit exposure to objectionable 
microbiological contaminants as appropriate. 
4.1.2. Buildings and facilities shall have adequate space for the orderly 
placement of equipment and materials to prevent mix -ups and 
contamination. 
4.1.3. Where the equipment itself (e.g., closed or contained systems) 
provides adequate protection of the material, such equipment can 
be located outdoors. 
4.1.4. The ﬂow of materials and personnel through the building or 
facilities shall be designed to prevent mix-ups or contamination. 
4.1.5. There shall be deﬁned areas or other control systems for the 
following activities:- 
(i) receipt, identiﬁcation, sampling and quarantine of incoming 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
materials, pending release or rejection; 
(ii) quarantine before release or rejection of intermediates and 
APIs; 
(iii) sampling of intermediates and APIs; 
(iv) holding rejected materials before further disposition (e.g., 
return, reprocessing or destruction); 
(v) storage of released materials; 
(vi) production operations; 
(vii) packaging and labelling operations; and 
(viii) laboratory operations. 
4.1.6. Adequate, clean washing and toilet facilities shall be provided for 
personnel. These washing facilities shall be equipped with hot 
and cold water as appropriate, soap or detergent, air driers or 
single use towels. The washing and toilet facilities shall be 
separate from, but easily accessible to the manufacturing areas. 
Adequate facilities for showering or changing clothes shall be 
provided, when appropriate. 
4.1.7. Laboratory areas and operations shall normally be separated from 
production areas. Some laboratory areas, in particular those used 
for in -process controls, can be located in production areas, 
provided the operations of the production process do not 
adversely affect the accuracy of the laboratory measurements and 
the laboratory and its operations do not adversely affect the 
production process or intermediates or APIs. 
4.2. Utilities- 
4.2.1. All utilities that could impact on product quality (e.g., steam, 
gases, compressed air and heating, ventilation and air 
conditioning) shall be qualiﬁed and appropriately monitored and 
action shall be taken when limits are exceeded. Drawings for 
these utility systems shall be available. 
4.2.2. Adequate ventilation, air ﬁltration and exhaust systems shall be 
provided, where appropriate. These systems shall be designed 
and constructed to minimise risks of contamination and cross -
contamination and shall include equipment for control of air 
pressure, microorganisms (if appro priate), dust, humidity and 
temperature as appropriate to the stage of manufacture. 
Particular attention shall be given to the areas where APIs are 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
exposed to the environment. 
4.2.3. If air is recirculated to production areas, appropriate measures 
shall be taken to control risks of contamination and cross -
contamination. 
4.2.4. Permanently installed pipework shall be appropriately identiﬁed. 
This can be accomplished by identifying individual lines, 
documentation, computer control systems or alternative means. 
Pipework shall be located to avoid risks of contamination of the 
intermediates or APIs. 
4.2.5. Drains shall be of adequate size and shall be provided with an air 
break or a suitable device to prevent back -siphonage, when 
appropriate. 
4.3. Water- 
4.3.1. Water used in the manufacture of APIs shall be demonstrated to 
be suitable for its intended use. 
4.3.2. Unless otherwise justiﬁed, proces s water shall, at a minimum, 
meet World Health Organisation guidelines for drinking 
(potable) water quality. 
4.3.3. If drinking (potable) water is insufﬁcient to assure API quality, 
and tighter chemical or microbiological water quality 
speciﬁcations are called fo r, appropriate speciﬁcations for 
physical and chemical attributes, total microbial counts, 
objectionable organisms or endotoxins shall be established. 
4.3.4. Where water used in the process is treated by the manufacturer 
to achieve a deﬁned quality, the treatment process shall be 
validated and monitored with appropriate action limits. 
4.3.5. Where the manufacturer of a non -sterile API either intends or 
claims that it is suitable for use in further processing to produce 
a sterile FPP, water used in the ﬁnal isolation and puriﬁcation 
steps shall be monitored and controlled for total microbial 
counts, objectionable organisms and endotoxins. 
4.4. Containment- 
4.4.1. Dedicated production areas, which can include facilities, air 
handling equipment and/or process equipment, shall be 
employed in the production of highly sensitising materials, such 
as penicillins or cytotoxic drugs or sex hormones or anabolic or 
androgenic steroids. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
4.4.2. Appropriate measures shall be established and implemented to 
prevent cross -contamination, e.g., from personnel o r materials, 
moving from one dedicated area to another. 
4.4.3. Any production activities (including weighing, milling or 
packaging) of highly toxic non -pharmaceutical materials shall 
not be conducted using the buildings and equipment being used 
for the production of APIs. Handling and storage of these highly 
toxic non-pharmaceutical materials shall be separate from APIs. 
4.5. Lighting- Adequate lighting shall be provided in all areas to facilitate 
cleaning, maintenance and proper operations. 
4.6. Sewage and refuse - Sewage, refuse and other wastes (e.g., solids, 
liquids, or gaseous by - products from manufacturing) in and from 
buildings and the immediate surrounding area shall be disposed of in a 
safe, timely and sanitary manner. Containers and pipes for waste 
material shall be clearly identiﬁed. 
4.7. Sanitation and maintenance:— 
4.7.1. Buildings used in the manufacture of intermediates and APIs 
shall be properly maintained and repaired and kept in a clean 
condition. 
4.7.2. Written procedures shall be established assigning responsibility 
for sani tation and describing the cleaning schedules, methods, 
equipment and materials to be used in cleaning buildings and 
facilities. 
4.7.3. When necessary, written procedures shall also be established for 
the use of suitable rodenticides, insecticides, fungicides, 
fumigating agents and cleaning and sanitising agents to prevent 
the contamination of equipment, raw materials, packaging or 
labelling materials, intermediates and APIs. 

5. Process equipment:- 
5.1. Design and construction- 
5.1.1. Equipment used in the manufacture of interme diates and APIs 
shall be of appropriate design and adequate size and suitably 
located for its intended use, cleaning, sanitisation (where 
appropriate) and maintenance. 
5.1.2. Equipment shall be constructed so that surfaces that contact raw 
materials, intermediates or APIs do not alter the quality of the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
intermediates and APIs beyond the ofﬁcial or other established 
speciﬁcations. 
5.1.3. Production equipment shall only be used within its qualiﬁed 
operating range. 
5.1.4. Major equipment (e.g., reactors and storage containers) and 
permanently installed processing lines used during the 
production of an intermediate or API shall be appropriately 
identiﬁed. 
5.1.5. Any substances associated with the operation of equipment, 
such as lubricants, heating ﬂuids or coolants shall not contact 
intermediates or APIs so as to alter their quality beyond the 
ofﬁcial or other established speciﬁcations. Any deviations from 
this shall be evaluated to ensure that there are no detrimental 
effects upon the ﬁtness for the purpose of the material. 
Wherever possible, food-grade lubricants and oils shall be used. 
5.1.6. Closed or contained equipment shall be used whenever 
appropriate. Where open equipment is used or equipment is 
opened, appropriate precautions shall be taken to minimise the 
risk of contamination. 
5.1.7. A set of current drawings shall be maintained for equipment and 
critical installations (e.g., instrumentation and utility systems). 
5.2. Equipment maintenance and cleaning- 
5.2.1. Schedules and procedures (including assignment of 
responsibility) shall be established for the pr eventive 
maintenance of equipment. 
5.2.2. Written procedures shall be established for cleaning of 
equipment and its subsequent release for use in the manufacture 
of intermediates and APIs. Cleaning procedures shall contain 
sufﬁcient details to enable operators to clean each type of 
equipment in a reproducible and effective manner. These 
procedures shall include:- 
(i) assignment of responsibility for cleaning of equipment; 
(ii) cleaning schedules including where appropriate, sanitising 
schedules; 
(iii) a complete description of t he methods and materials 
including dilution of cleaning agents used to clean 
equipment; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(iv) when appropriate, instructions for disassembling and 
reassembling each article of equipment to ensure proper 
cleaning; 
(v) instructions for the removal or obliteration of p revious 
batch identiﬁcation; 
(vi) instructions for the protection of clean equipment from 
contamination prior to use; 
(vii) inspection of equipment for cleanliness immediately before 
use, if practical; and 
(viii) establishing the maximum time that may elapse between 
the com pletion of processing and equipment cleaning, 
when appropriate. 
5.2.3. Equipment and utensils shall be cleaned, stored and, where 
appropriate, sanitised or sterilised to prevent contamination or 
carryover of a material that would alter the quality of the 
intermediate or API beyond the ofﬁcial or other established 
speciﬁcations. 
5.2.4. Where equipment is assigned to continuous production or 
campaign production of successive batches of the same 
intermediate or API, this equipment shall be cleaned at 
appropriate intervals to preve nt build -up and carry -over of 
contaminants (e.g., degradants or objectionable levels of 
microorganisms). 
5.2.5. Non-dedicated equipment shall be cleaned between production 
of different materials to prevent cross-contamination. 
5.2.6. Acceptance criteria for residues and the choice of cleaning 
procedures and cleaning agents shall be deﬁned and justiﬁed. 
5.2.7. Equipment shall be identiﬁed as to its contents and its 
cleanliness status by appropriate means. 
5.3. Calibration- 
5.3.1. Control, weighing, measuring, monitoring and test equipment 
that is critical for assuring the quality of intermediates or APIs 
shall be calibrated according to written procedures and an 
established schedule. 
5.3.2. Equipment calibrations shall be performed using standards 
traceable to certiﬁed standards, if these exist. 
5.3.3. Records of these calibrations shall be maintained. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
5.3.4. The current calibration status of critical equipment shall be 
known and veriﬁable. 
5.3.5. Instruments that do not meet calibration criteria shall not be 
used. 
5.3.6. Deviations from approved standards of calibration on cr itical 
instruments shall be investigated to determine if these could 
have had an impact on the quality of the intermediates or APIs 
manufactured using this equipment since the last successful 
calibration. 
5.4. Computerised systems- 
5.4.1. GMP-related computerised syst ems shall be validated. The 
depth and scope of validation depends on the diversity, 
complexity and criticality of the computerised application. 
5.4.2. Appropriate installation qualiﬁcation and operational 
qualiﬁcation shall demonstrate the suitability of computer 
hardware and software to perform assigned tasks. 
5.4.3. Commercially available software that has been qualiﬁed does 
not require the same level of test ing. If an existing system was 
not validated at the time of installation, a retrospective 
validation could be conducted, if appropriate documentation is 
available. 
5.4.4. Computerised systems shall have sufﬁcient controls to prevent 
unauthorised access or changes to data. There shall be controls 
to prevent omissions in data (e.g., the system being turned off 
and data not captured). There shall be a record of any data 
change made, the previous entry, the person who made the 
change and when the change was made. 
5.4.5. Written procedures shall be available for the operation and 
maintenance of computerised systems. 
5.4.6. Where critical data are being entered manually, there shall be 
an additional check on the accuracy of the data entered. This 
can be done by a second operator or by the system itself. 
5.4.7. Incidents related to computerised systems that could affect the 
quality of intermediates or APIs or the reliability of records or 
test results shall be recorded and investigated. 
5.4.8. Changes to the computerised system shall be made according to 
a change procedure and shall be formally authorised, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
documented and tested. Records shall be kept of all changes, 
including modiﬁcations and enhancements made to the 
hardware, software and any other critical component of the 
system. These records shal l demonstrate that the system is 
maintained in a validated state. 
5.4.9. A back -up system shall be provided so that there is no 
permanent loss of records due to system breakdown or failure. 
Means of ensuring data protection shall be established for all 
computerised systems. 
5.4.10. Data may be recorded by a second means in addition to the 
computer system. 

6. Documentation and records:- 
6.1. Documentation system and speciﬁcations- 
6.1.1. All documents related to the manufacture of intermediates or 
APIs shall be prepared, reviewed, approved and distributed 
according to written procedures. Such documents can be in 
paper or electronic form. 
6.1.2. The issuance, revisi on, superseding and withdrawal of all 
documents shall be controlled with maintenance of revision 
histories. 
6.1.3. A procedure shall be established for retaining all appropriate 
documents (e.g., development history reports, scale -up reports, 
technical transfer re ports, process validation reports, training 
records, production records, control records a nd distribution 
records). The retention periods for these documents shall be 
speciﬁed. 
6.1.4. All production, control and distribution records shall be 
retained for at least one year after the expiry date of the batch. 
For APIs with retest dates, records shall be retained for at least 
three years after the batch is completely distributed. 
6.1.5. Entries in records shall be made indelibly in spaces provided 
for such entries, directly after performing the activities and 
shall identify the person making the entry. Correctio ns to 
entries shall be dated and signed ensuring that the original entry 
remains readable. 
6.1.6. During the retention period, originals or copies of records shall 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
be readily available at the establishment where the activities 
described in these records occurred. Records that can be 
promptly retrieved from another location by electronic or other 
means are acceptable. 
6.1.7. Speciﬁcations, instructions, procedures and records can be 
retained either as originals or as true copies such as 
photocopies, microﬁlm, microﬁche or other accurate 
reproductions of the original records. Where reduction 
techniques such as microﬁlming or electronic records are used, 
suitable retrieval equipment and a means to produce a hard 
copy shall be readily available. 
6.1.8. Speciﬁcations shall be establi shed and documented for raw 
materials, intermediates where necessary, APIs and labelling 
and packaging materials. In addition, speciﬁcations may be 
appropriate for certain other materials, such as process aids, 
gaskets or other materials used during the pr oduction of 
intermediates or APIs that could critically impact on quality. 
Acceptance criteria shall be established and documented for in -
process controls. 
6.1.9. If electronic signatures are used on documents they shall be 
authenticated and secure. 
6.2. Equipment cleaning and use record- 
6.2.1. Records of major equipment use, cleaning, sanitisation and 
sterilisation and maintenance shall show the date, time (if 
appropriate), product and batch number of each batch processed 
in the equipment and the person who performed the cl eaning 
and maintenance. 
6.2.2. If equipment is dedicated to manufacturing one intermediate or 
API, then individual equipment records are not necessary if 
batches of the intermediate or API follow in traceable sequence. 
In cases where dedicated equipment is employed, the records of 
cleaning, maintenance and use can be part of the batch record 
or maintained separately. 
6.3. Records of raw materials, intermediates, API labelling and 
packaging materials- 
6.3.1. Records of raw materials, intermediates, API labelling and 
packaging materials shall be maintained including:- 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(i) the name of the manufacturer, identity and quantity of each 
shipment of each batch of raw materials, intermediates or 
labelling and packaging materials for APIs; the name of the 
supplier; the supplier’s control num bers, if known, or other 
identiﬁcation number; the number allocated on receipt; and 
the date of receipt; 
(ii) the results of any test or examination performed and the 
conclusions derived from this; 
(iii) records tracing the use of materials; 
(iv) documentation of the exam ination and review of API 
labelling and packaging material for conformity with 
established speciﬁcations; and 
(v) the ﬁnal decision regarding rejected raw materials, 
intermediates or API labelling and packaging materials. 
6.3.2. Master (approved) labels shall be main tained for comparison to 
issued labels. 
6.4. Master production instructions (master production and control 
records):- 
6.4.1. To ensure uniformity from batch to batch, master production 
instructions for each intermediate and API shall be prepared, 
dated and signed by o ne person and independently checked, 
dated and signed by a person in the quality units. 
6.4.2. Master production instructions shall include:- 
(i) the name of the intermediate or API being manufactured and 
an identifying document reference code, if applicable; 
(ii) a complete list of raw materials and intermediates designated 
by names or codes sufﬁciently speciﬁc to identify any special 
quality characteristics; 
(iii) an accurate statement of the quantity or ratio of each raw 
material or intermediate to be used, including the unit of 
measure. Where the quantity is not ﬁxed, the calculation for 
each batch size or rate of production shall be included. 
Variations to quantities shall be included where they are 
justiﬁed; 
(iv) the production location and major production equipment to be 
used; 
(v) detailed production instructions, including the- 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) sequences to be followed; 
(b) ranges of process parameters to be used; 
(c) sampling instructions and in -process controls with their 
acceptance criteria, where appropriate; 
(d) time limits for completion of individual p rocessing steps 
and the total process, where appropriate; and 
(e) expected yield ranges at appropriate phases of processing 
or time; 
(vi) where appropriate, special notations and precautions to be 
followed, or cross-references; and 
(vii) the instructions for storage of the intermediate or API to 
assure its suitability for use, including the labelling and 
packaging materials and special storage conditions with time 
limits, where appropriate. 
6.5. Batch production records (batch production and control records)- 
6.5.1. Batch production records shall be prepared for each intermediate 
and API and shall include complete information relating to the 
production and control of each batch. The batch production 
record shall be checked before issuance to assure that it is the 
correct version and is a legible accurate reproduction of the 
appropriate master production instruction. If the batch production 
record is produced from a separate part of the master document, 
that document shall include a reference to the current master 
production instruction being used. 
6.5.2. These records shall be numbered with a unique batch or 
identiﬁcation number, dated and signed when issued. In 
continuous production, the product code, together with the date 
and time can serve as the unique identiﬁer until the ﬁnal number 
is allocated. 
6.5.3. Documentation of completion of each signiﬁcant step in the 
batch production records (batch production and control records) 
shall include- 
(i) dates and, when appropriate, times; 
(ii) identity of major equipment (e.g., reactors, driers and mills) 
used; 
(iii) speciﬁc identiﬁc ation of each batch, including weights, 
measures and batch numbers of raw materials, intermediates 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
or any reprocessed materials used during manufacturing; 
(iv) actual results recorded for critical process parameters; 
(v) any sampling performed; 
(vi) signatures of the pe rsons performing and directly supervising 
or checking each critical step in the operation; 
(vii) in-process and laboratory test results; 
(viii) actual yield at appropriate phases or times; 
(ix) description of packaging and label for intermediate or API; 
(x) representative label of API or intermediate, if made 
commercially available; 
(xi) any deviation noted, its evaluation, investigation conducted 
(if appropriate) or reference to that investigation, if stored 
separately; and 
(xii) results of release testing. 
6.5.4. Written procedures shall be est ablished and followed for 
investigating critical deviations or the failure of a batch of 
intermediate or API to meet speciﬁcations. The investigation 
shall extend to other batches that may have been associated with 
the speciﬁc failure or deviation. 
6.6. Laboratory control records- 
6.6.1. Laboratory control records shall include complete data derived 
from all tests conducted to ensure compliance with established 
speciﬁcations and standards, including examinations and assays, 
as follows- 
(i) a description of samples received for testing, including the 
name of the material or its source, batch number or other 
distinctive code, the date on which the sample was taken and 
where appropriate, the quantity and date the sample was 
received for testing; 
(ii) a statement of reference to each test method used; 
(iii) a statement of the weight or measure of sample used for 
each test as described by the method; 
(iv) data on or cross reference to the preparation and testing of 
reference standards, reagents and standard solutions; 
(v) a complete record of all raw data generated during each test, 
in addition to graphs, charts and spectra from laboratory 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
instrumentation, properly identiﬁed to show the speciﬁc 
material and batch tested; 
(vi) a record of all calculations performed in connection with the 
test, including, for example, units of measure, conversion 
factors and equivalency factors; 
(vii) a statement of the test results and how they compare with 
established acceptance criteria; 
(viii) the signature of the person who performed each test and the 
dates the tests were performed; and 
(ix) the date and signature of a second person showing that the 
original records have been reviewed for accuracy, 
completeness and compliance with established standards. 
6.6.2. Complete records shall also be maintained for- 
(i) any modiﬁcations to an established analytical method; 
(ii) periodic calibration of laboratory instruments, apparatus, 
gauges and recording devices; 
(iii) all stability testing performed on APIs; and 
(iv) out of speciﬁcation (OOS) investigations. 
6.7. Batch production record review- 
6.7.1. Written procedures shall be established and followed for the 
review and approval of batch production and laboratory control 
records including packaging and labelling to determine 
compliance of the intermediate or API with established 
speciﬁcations before a batch is released or distributed. 
6.7.2. Batch production and laboratory control records of critical 
process steps shall be reviewed and approved by the quality units 
before an API batch is released or distributed. Production and 
laboratory control records of non -critical process steps can be 
reviewed by qualiﬁed production personnel or other units 
following procedures approved by the quality units. 
6.7.3. All deviation, investigation and OOS reports shall be reviewed as 
part of the batch record review before the batch is released. 
6.7.4. The quality units can delegate to the production unit the 
responsibility and authority for release of intermediates, except 
for those shipped outside the control of the manufacturing 
company. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
7. Materials management:- 
7.1. General controls- 
7.1.1. There shall be written procedures describing the receipt, 
identiﬁcation, quarantine, storage, handling, sampling, testing 
and approval or rejection of materials. 
7.1.2. Manufacturers of intermediates or APIs or both shall have a 
system for evaluating the suppliers of critical materials. 
7.1.3. Materials shall be purchased against an agreed speciﬁcation, 
from a supplier or suppliers approved by the quality units. 
7.1.4. If the supplier of a critical material is not the manufacturer of that 
material, the name and address of that man ufacturer shall be 
known to the intermediate or API manufacturer or both. 
7.1.5. Changing the source of supply of critical raw materials shall be 
done according to paragraph 13 of this Part. 
7.2. Receipt and quarantine- 
7.2.1. Upon receipt and before acceptance, each contai ner or grouping 
of containers of materials shall be examined visually for correct 
labelling (including correlation between the name used by the 
supplier and the in-house name, if these are different), damage to 
containers, broken seals and evidence of tamp ering or 
contamination. Materials shall be held under quarantine until 
they have been sampled, examined or tested as appropriate, and 
then released for use. 
7.2.2. Before incoming materials are mixed with existing stocks (e.g., 
solvents or stocks in silos), they shall be identiﬁed as correct, 
tested, if appropriate and released. Procedures shall be available 
to prevent discharging incoming materials wrongly into the 
existing stock. 
7.2.3. If bulk deliveries are made in non -dedicated tankers, there shall 
be assurance of n o cross-contamination from the tanker. Means 
of providing this assurance could include one or more of the 
following- 
(i) certiﬁcate of cleaning; 
(ii) testing for trace impurities; and 
(iii) audit of the supplier. 
7.2.4. Large storage containers and their attendan t manifolds, ﬁlling 
and discharge lines shall be appropriately identiﬁed. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
7.2.5. Each container or grouping of containers (batches) of materials 
shall be assigned and identiﬁed with a distinctive code, batch or 
receipt number. This number shall be used in recordi ng the 
disposition of each batch. A system shall be in place to identify 
the status of each batch. 
7.3. Sampling and testing of incoming production materials- 
7.3.1. At least one test to verify the identity of each batch of material 
shall be conducted, with the except ion of the materials described 
below in paragraph 7.3.2. A supplier’s certiﬁcate of analysis can 
be used in place of performing other tests, provided that the 
manufacturer has a system in place to evaluate suppliers. 
7.3.2. Supplier approval shall include an eval uation that provides 
adequate evidence (e.g., past quality history) that the 
manufacturer can consistently provide material meeting 
speciﬁcations. Full analysis shall be conducted on at least three 
batches before reducing in -house testing. However, as a 
minimum, a full analysis shall be performed at appropriate 
intervals and compared with the certiﬁcates of analysis. 
Reliability of certiﬁcates of analysis shall be checked at regular 
intervals. 
7.3.3. Processing aids, hazardous or highly toxic raw materials, other 
special materials or materials transferred to another unit within 
the company’s control do not need to be tested if the 
manufacturer’s certiﬁcate of analysis is obtained, showing that 
these raw materials conform to established speciﬁcations. Visual 
examination of containers, labels and recording of batch numbers 
shall help in establishing the identity of these materials. The lack 
of on -site testing for these materials shall be justiﬁed and 
documented. 
7.3.4. Samples shall be representative of the batch of material from 
which they are taken. Sampling methods shall specify the 
number of containers to be sampled, which part of the container 
to sample, and the amount of material to be taken from each 
container. The decision on the number of containers to sample 
and the sample size shall be based upon a sampling plan that 
takes into consideration the criticality of the material, variability 
of the material, past quality history of the supplier and the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
quantity needed for analysis. 
7.3.5. Sampling shall be conducted at deﬁned locations and by 
procedures designed to prevent contamination of the material 
sampled and contamination of other materials. 
7.3.6. Containers from which samples are withdrawn shall be opened 
carefully and subsequently reclose d. They shall be marked to 
indicate that a sample has been taken. 
7.4. Storage- 
7.4.1. Materials shall be handled and stored in such a manner as to 
prevent degradation, contamination and cross-contamination. 
7.4.2. Materials stored in ﬁbre drums, bags or boxes shall be store d off 
the ﬂoor and, when appropriate, suitably spaced to permit 
cleaning and inspection. 
7.4.3. Materials shall be stored under conditions and for a period that 
will have no adverse effect on their quality and shall normally be 
controlled so that the oldest stock is used ﬁrst. 
7.4.4. Certain materials in suitable containers can be stored outdoors, 
provided identifying labels remain legible and containers are 
appropriately cleaned before opening and use. 
7.4.5. Rejected materials shall be identiﬁed and controlled under a 
quarantine system designed to prevent their unauthorised use in 
manufacturing. 
7.5. Re-evaluation- Materials shall be re -evaluated as appropriate to 
determine their suitability for use (e.g., after prolonged storage or 
exposure to heat or humidity). 

8. Production and in-process controls:- 
8.1. Production operations- 
8.1.1. Raw materials for manufacturing of intermediates and APIs shall 
be weighed or measured under appropriate conditions that do not 
affect their suitability for use. Weighing and measuring devices 
shall be of suitable accuracy for the intended use. 
8.1.2. If a material is sub-divided for later use in production operations, 
the container receiving the material shall be suitable and shall be 
identiﬁed that the following information is available- 
(i) material name or item code; 
(ii) receiving or control number; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(iii) weight or measure of material in the new container; and 
(iv) re-evaluation or retest date, if appropriate. 
8.1.3. Critical weighing, measuring or sub -dividing operations shall be 
witnessed or subjected to an equivalent control. Prior to use, 
production personnel shall verify that the materials are those 
speciﬁed in the batch record for the intended intermediate or 
API. 
8.1.4. Other critical activities shall be witnessed or subjected to an 
equivalent control. 
8.1.5. Actual yields shall be compared with expect ed yields at 
designated steps in the production process. Expected yields with 
appropriate ranges shall be established based on previous 
laboratory, pilot scale or manufacturing data. Deviations in yield 
associated with critical process steps shall be inves tigated to 
determine their impact or potential impact on the resulting 
quality of affected batches. 
8.1.6. Any deviation shall be documented and explained. Any critical 
deviation shall be investigated. 
8.1.7. The processing status of major units of equipment shall be 
indicated either on the individual units of equipment or by 
appropriate documentation, computer control systems or 
alternative means. 
8.1.8. Materials to be reprocessed or reworked shall be appropriately 
controlled to prevent unauthorised use. 
8.2. Time limits- 
8.2.1. If time limits are speciﬁed in the master production instructions 
(see paragraph 6.4.2), these time limits shall be met to ensure the 
quality of intermediates and APIs. Deviations shall be 
documented and evaluated. Time limits may be inappropriate 
when processing to a target value (e.g., pH adjustment, 
hydrogenation or drying to a predetermined speciﬁcation) 
because completion of reactions or processing steps are 
determined by in-process sampling and testing. 
8.2.2. Intermediates held for further processing shall be store d under 
appropriate conditions to ensure their suitability for use. 
8.3. In-process sampling and control- 
8.3.1. Written procedures shall be established to monitor the progress 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
and control the performance of processing steps that cause 
variability in the quality chara cteristics of intermediates and 
APIs. In-process controls and their acceptance criteria shall be 
deﬁned based on the information gained during the development 
stage or historical data. 
8.3.2. The acceptance criteria and type and extent of testing can 
depend on th e nature of the intermediate or API being 
manufactured, the reaction or process step being conducted and 
the degree to which the process introduces variability in the 
product’s quality. Less stringent in -process controls may be 
appropriate in early process ing steps, whereas tighter controls 
may be appropriate for later processing steps (e.g., isolation and 
puriﬁcation steps). 
8.3.3. Critical in -process controls (and critical process monitoring), 
including the control points and methods, shall be stated in 
writing and approved by the quality units. 
8.3.4. In-process controls can be performed by qualiﬁed production 
department personnel and the process adjusted without prior 
quality units’ approval if the adjustments are made within pre -
established limits approved by the qua lity units. All tests and 
results shall be fully documented as part of the batch record. 
8.3.5. Written procedures shall describe the sampling methods for in -
process materials, intermediates and APIs. Sampling plans and 
procedures shall be based on scientiﬁcally sound sampling 
practices. 
8.3.6. In-process sampling shall be conducted using procedures 
designed to prevent contamination of the sampled material and 
other intermediates or APIs. Procedures shall be established to 
ensure the integrity of samples after collection. 
8.3.7. OOS investigations are not normally needed for in -process tests 
that are performed for the purpose of monitoring or adjusting the 
process. 
8.4. Blending batches of intermediates or APIs- 
8.4.1. For the purpose of this Schedule, blending is deﬁned as the 
process of combining materials within the same speciﬁcation to 
produce a homogeneous intermediate or API. In-process mixing 
of fractions from single batches (e.g. collecting several 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
centrifuge loa ds from a single crystallisation batch) or 
combining fractions from several batches for further processing 
is considered to be part of the production process and is not 
considered to be blending. 
8.4.2. OOS batches shall not be blended with other batches for the 
purpose of meeting speciﬁcations. Each batch incorporated into 
the blend shall have been manufactured using an established 
process and shall have been individually tested and found to 
meet appropriate speciﬁcations prior to blending. 
8.4.3. Acceptable blending operations include but are not limited to- 
(i) blending of small batches to increase batch size; 
(I) blending of tailings (i.e., relatively small quantities of 
isolated material) from batches of the same intermediate 
or API to form a single batch. 
8.4.4. Blending processes shall be adequately controlled and 
documented and the blended batch sha ll be tested for 
conformance to established speciﬁcations, where appropriate. 
8.4.5. The batch record of the blending process shall allow traceability 
back to the individual batches that make up the blend. 
8.4.6. Where physical attributes of the API are critical (e.g., APIs 
intended for use in solid oral dosage forms or suspensions), 
blending operations shall be validated to show homogeneity of 
the combined batch. Validation shall include testing of critical 
attributes (e.g., particle size distribution, bulk density and tap 
density) that may be affected by the blending process. 
8.4.7. If the blending could adversely affect stability, stability testing 
of the ﬁnal blended batches shall be performed. 
8.4.8. The expiry or retest date of the blended batch shall be based on 
the manufacturing date of the oldest tailings or batch in the 
blend. 
8.5. Contamination control- 
8.5.1. Residual materials can be carried over into successive batches 
of the same intermediate or API, if there is adequate control. 
Examples include residue adhering to the wall of a microniser, 
residual layer of damp crystals remaining in a cen trifuge bowl 
after discharge and incomplete discharge of ﬂuids or crystals 
from a processing vessel upon transfer of the material to the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
next step in the process. Such carryover shall not result in the 
carry-over of degradants or microbial contamination th at may 
adversely alter the established impurity proﬁle of the API. 
8.5.2. Production operations shall be conducted in a manner that will 
prevent contamination of intermediates or APIs by other 
materials. 
8.5.3. Precautions to avoid contamination shall be taken when APIs 
are handled after puriﬁcation. 

9. Packaging and identiﬁcation labelling of APIs and intermediates:- 
9.1. General- 
9.1.1. There shall be written procedures describing the receipt, 
identiﬁcation, quarantine, sampling, examination, testing and 
release and handling of packaging and labelling materials. 
9.1.2. Packaging and labelling materials shall conform to the 
established speciﬁcations. Those that do not comply with the 
speciﬁcations shall be rejected to prevent their use in operations 
for which they are unsuitable. 
9.1.3. Records sha ll be maintained for each shipment of labels and 
packaging materials showing receipt, examination or testing 
and whether they are accepted or rejected. 
9.2. Packaging materials- 
9.2.1. Containers shall provide adequate protection against 
deterioration or contamination of the intermediate or API that 
may occur during transportation and recommended storage. 
9.2.2. Containers shall be clean and where indicated by the nature of 
the intermediate or API, sanitised to ensure that they are 
suitable for their intended use. These conta iners shall not be 
reactive, additive or absorptive to ensure that they do not alter 
the quality of the intermediate or API beyond the speciﬁed 
limits. 
9.2.3. If containers are reused, they shall be cleaned in accordance 
with documented procedures and all previou s labels shall be 
removed or defaced. 
9.3. Label issuance and control- 
9.3.1. Access to the label storage areas shall be limited to authorised 
personnel. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
9.3.2. Procedures shall be used to reconcile the quantities of labels 
issued, used and returned and to evaluate discrepan cies found 
between the number of containers labelled and the number of 
labels issued. Such discrepancies shall be investigated and the 
investigation shall be approved by the quality units. 
9.3.3. All excess labels bearing batch numbers or other batch -related 
printing shall be destroyed. Returned labels shall be retained 
and stored in a manner that prevents mix -ups and provides 
proper identiﬁcation. 
9.3.4. Obsolete and out dated labels shall be destroyed. 
9.3.5. Printing devices used to print labels for packaging operations 
shall be controlled to ensure that all imprinting conforms to the 
print speciﬁed in the batch production record. 
9.3.6. Printed labels issued for a batch shall be carefully examined for 
proper identity and conformity to speciﬁcations in the master 
production record. The results of this examination shall be 
documented. 
9.3.7. A printed label representative of those used shall be included in 
the batch production record. 
9.4. Packaging and labelling operations- 
9.4.1. There shall be documented procedures designed to ensure that 
the correct packaging materials and labels are used. 
9.4.2. Labelling operations shall be designed to prevent mix -ups. 
They shall be physically or spatially separated from operations 
involving other intermediates or APIs. 
9.4.3. Labels used on containers of intermediates or APIs s hall 
indicate the name or identifying code, the batch number of the 
product and the storage conditions, when such information is 
critical to assure the quality of the intermediate or API. 
9.4.4. If the intermediate or API is intended to be transferred outside 
the control of the manufacturer’s material management system, 
the name and address of the manufacturer, quantity of contents 
and special transport conditions and any special legal 
requirements shall also be included on the label. For 
intermediates or APIs wit h an expiry date, this date shall be 
indicated on the label and certiﬁcate of analysis. For 
intermediates or APIs with a retest date, the retest date shall be 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
indicated on the label and certiﬁcate of analysis. 
9.4.5. Packaging and labelling facilities shall be in spected 
immediately before use to ensure that all materials not needed 
for the next packaging operation have been removed. This 
examination shall be documented in the batch production 
records, the facility log or other documentation system. 
9.4.6. Packaged and labelled intermediates or APIs shall be examined 
to ensure that containers and packages in the batch have the 
correct label. This examination shall be part of the packaging 
operation. Results of these examinations shall be recorded in 
the batch production or control records. 
9.4.7. Intermediate or API containers that are transported outside the 
manufacturer’s control shall be sealed in a manner such that, if 
the seal is breached or missing, the recipient will be alerted to 
the possibility that the contents may have been altered. 

10. Storage and distribution:- 
10.1. Warehousing procedures- 
10.1.1. Facilities shall be available for the storage of all materials under 
appropriate conditions (e.g., controlled temperature and 
humidity when necessary). Records shall be maintained of these 
conditions, if they are critical for the maintenance of material 
characteristics. 
10.1.2. Unless there is an alternative system to prevent the unintentional 
or unauthorised use of quarantined, rejected, returned or recalled 
materials, separate storage areas shall b e assigned for their 
temporary storage until the decision as to their future use has 
been taken. 
10.2. Distribution procedures- 
10.2.1. APIs and intermediates shall only be released for distribution to 
third parties after they have been released by the quality units. 
APIs and intermediates can be transferred under quarantine to 
another unit under the company’s control when authorised by 
the quality units and if appropriate controls and documentation 
are in place. 
10.2.2. APIs and intermediates shall be transported in a manner th at 
does not adversely affect their quality. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
10.2.3. Special transport or storage conditions for an API or 
intermediate shall be stated on the label. 
10.2.4. The manufacturer shall ensure that the contract acceptor 
(contractor) for transportation of the API or intermediate knows 
and follows the appropriate transport and storage conditions. 
10.2.5. A system shall be in place by which the distribution of each 
batch of intermediate or API or both can be readily determined 
to permit its recall. 

11. Laboratory controls:- 
11.1. General controls- 
11.1.1. The independent quality units shall have at its disposal 
adequate laboratory facilities. 
11.1.2. There shall be documented procedures describing sampling, 
testing, approval or rejection of materials and recording and 
storage of laboratory data. Laboratory records shall be 
maintained in accordance with paragraph 6.6. 
11.1.3. All speciﬁcations, sampling plans and test procedures shall be 
scientiﬁcally sound and appropriate to ensure that raw 
materials, intermediates, APIs, labels and packaging materials 
conform to establishe d standards of quality and purity. 
Speciﬁcations and test procedures shall be consistent with those 
included in the registration or ﬁling. There can be speciﬁcations 
in addition to those in the registration or ﬁling. Speciﬁcations, 
sampling plans and test procedures, including changes to them, 
shall be drafted by the appropriate organisational unit and 
reviewed and approved by the quality units. 
11.1.4. Appropriate speciﬁcations shall be established for APIs in 
accordance with accepted standards and be consistent w ith the 
manufacturing process. The speciﬁcations shall include a 
control of the impurities (e.g., organic impurities, inorganic 
impurities and residual solvents). If the API has a speciﬁcation 
for microbiological purity, appropriate action limits for total 
microbial counts and objectionable organisms shall be 
established and met. If the API has a speciﬁcation for 
endotoxins, appropriate action limits shall be established and 
met. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
11.1.5. Laboratory controls shall be followed and documented at the 
time of performanc e. Any departure from the procedures 
described in paragraph 11.1.4 shall be documented and 
explained. 
11.1.6. Any OOS result obtained shall be investigated and documented 
according to the procedure. This procedure shall require 
analysis of the data, assessment of whether a signiﬁcant 
problem exists, allocation of the tasks for corrective actions and 
conclusions. Any resampling or retesting after OOS results 
shall be performed according to the documented procedure. 
11.1.7. Reagents and standard solutions shall be prepared a nd labelled 
following written procedures. “Use by” dates shall be applied 
as appropriate for analytical reagents or standard solutions. 
11.1.8. Primary reference standards shall be obtained as appropriate for 
the manufacture of APIs. The source of each primary ref erence 
standard shall be documented. Records shall be maintained of 
each primary reference standard’s storage and use in 
accordance with the supplier’s recommendations. Primary 
reference standards obtained from an officially recognised 
source are normally used without testing if stored under 
conditions consistent with the supplier’s recommendations. 
11.1.9. Where a primary reference standard is not available from an 
ofﬁcially recognised source, an “in -house primary standard” 
shall be established. Appropriate testin g shall be performed to 
establish fully the identity and purity of the primary reference 
standard. Appropriate documentation of this testing shall be 
maintained. 
11.1.10. Secondary reference standards shall be appropriately prepared, 
identiﬁed, tested, approved and stored. The suitability of each 
batch of secondary reference standard shall be determined prior 
to ﬁrst use by comparing against a primary reference standard. 
Each batch of secondary reference standard shall be 
periodically requaliﬁed in accordance with a written protocol. 
11.2. Testing of intermediates and APIs- 
11.2.1. For each batch of intermediate and API, appropriate laboratory 
tests shall be conducted to determine conformance to the 
speciﬁcations. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
11.2.2. An impurity proﬁle describing the identiﬁed and unidentiﬁed 
impurities present in a typical batch produced by a speciﬁc 
controlled production process shall normally be established for 
each API. The impurity proﬁle shall include the identity or 
some qualitative analytical designation (e.g., retention time), 
the range of ea ch impurity observed and classiﬁcation of each 
identiﬁed impurity (e.g., inorganic, organic or solvent). The 
impurity proﬁle is normally dependent upon the production 
process and origin of the API. Impurity proﬁles are normally 
not necessary for APIs of phytopharmaceutical or animal tissue 
origin. Biotechnology considerations are covered in ICH 
Guideline Q6B (1). 
11.2.3. The impurity proﬁle shall be compared at appropriate intervals 
with the impurity proﬁle in the regulatory submission or 
compared with his torical data in order to detect changes to the 
API resulting from modiﬁcations to raw materials, equipment 
operating parameters or the production process. 
11.2.4. Appropriate microbiological tests shall be conducted on each 
batch of intermediate and API where micr obial quality is 
speciﬁed. 
11.3. Certiﬁcates of analysis- 
11.3.1. Authentic certiﬁcates of analysis shall be issued for each batch 
of intermediate or API on request. 
11.3.2. Information on the name of the intermediate or API, including 
where appropriate its grade, the batch num ber and the date of 
release, shall be provided on the certiﬁcate of analysis. For 
intermediates or APIs with an expiry date, the expiry date shall 
be provided on the label and certiﬁcate of analysis. For 
intermediates or APIs with a retest date, the retest date shall be 
indicated on the label and certiﬁcate of analysis. 
11.3.3. The certiﬁcate shall list each test performed in accordance with 
compendial or customer requirements, including the 
acceptance limits and the numerical results obtained (if test 
results are numerical). 
11.3.4. Certiﬁcates shall be dated and signed by authorised personnel 
from the quality units and shall show the name, address and 
telephone number of the original manufacturer. Where the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
analysis has been carried out by a repacker or reprocessor, the 
certiﬁcate of analysis shall show the name, address and 
telephone number of the repacker or reprocessor and a 
reference to the name of the original manufacturer. 
11.3.5. If new certiﬁcates are issued by or on behalf of repackers or 
reprocessors, agents or brokers, these certiﬁcates shall show the 
name, address and telephone number of the laboratory that 
performed the analysis. They shall also contain a reference to 
the name and address of the original manufacturer and to the 
original batch certiﬁcate, a copy of which shall be attached. 
11.4. Stability monitoring of APIs- 
11.4.1. A documented, on -going testing programme shall be designed 
to monitor the stability characteristics of APIs and the results 
shall be used to conﬁrm appropriate storage conditions and 
retest or expiry dates. 
11.4.2. The test procedures used in stability testing shall be validated 
and be stability-indicating. 
11.4.3. Stability samples shall be stored in containers that simulate the 
market container. For example, if the API is marketed in bags 
within ﬁbre drums, stability sam ples can be packaged in bags 
of the same material and in smaller drums of similar or 
identical material composition to the drums in which the API is 
marketed. 
11.4.4. Normally the ﬁrst three commercial production batches shall 
be placed on the stability monitoring programme to conﬁrm the 
retest or expiry date. However, where data from previous 
studies show that the API is expected to remain stable for at 
least two years, fewer than three batches can be used. 
11.4.5. Thereafter at least one batch per year of API manufacture d 
(unless none is produced that year) shall be added to the 
stability monitoring programme and tested at least annually to 
conﬁrm the stability. 
11.4.6. For APIs with short shelf -lives, testing shall be done more 
frequently. For example, for those biotechnological or 
biological and other APIs with shelf -lives of one year or less, 
stability samples shall be obtained and shall be tested monthly 
for the ﬁrst three months, and at three -monthly intervals after 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
that. When data exist that conﬁrm that the stability of the API 
is not compromised, elimination of speciﬁc test intervals (e.g., 
nine-month testing) can be considered. 
11.5. Expiry and retest dating- 
11.5.1. When an intermediate is intended to be transferred outside the 
control of the manufacturer’s material management system and 
an expiry or retest date is assigned, supporting stability 
information shall be available (e.g., published data and test 
results). 
11.5.2. An API expiry or retest date shall be based on an evaluation of 
data derived from stability studies. Common practice is to use 
a retest date, not an expiration date. 
11.5.3. Preliminary API expiry or retest dates can be based on pilot -
scale batches if- 
(i) the pilot batches employ a method of manufacture and a 
procedure that simulates the ﬁnal process to be used on a 
commercial manufacturing scale; and 
(ii) the quality of the API represents the material to be made on 
a commercial scale. 
11.5.4. A representative sample sh all be taken for the purpose of 
performing a retest. 
11.6. Reserve or retention samples- 
11.6.1. The packaging and holding of reserve samples is for the 
purpose of potential future evaluation of the quality of batches 
of API and not for future stability testing. 
11.6.2. Appropriately identiﬁed reserve samples of each batch of API 
shall be retained for one year after the expiry date assigned by 
the manufacturer to the batch, or for three years after 
distribution of the batch, whichever is longer. For APIs with 
retest dates, simil ar reserve samples shall be retained for three 
years after the batch has been completely distributed by the 
manufacturer. 
11.6.3. The reserve sample shall be stored in the same packaging 
system in which the API is stored or in one that is equivalent to 
or more pro tective than the marketed packaging system. 
Sufﬁcient quantities shall be retained to conduct at least two full 
compendial analyses or, when there is no pharmacopoeial 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
monograph, two full speciﬁcation analyses. 

12. Validation:- 
12.1. Validation policy- 
12.1.1. The company’ s overall policy, intentions and approach to 
validation, including the validation of production processes, 
cleaning procedures, analytical methods, in -process control test 
procedures, computerized systems and personnel responsible 
for design, review, appro val and documentation of each 
validation phase, shall be documented. 
12.1.2. The critical parameters and attributes shall normally be 
identiﬁed during the development stage or from historical data 
and the ranges necessary for the reproducible operation shall be 
deﬁned. This shall include- 
(i) deﬁning the API in terms of its critical product attributes; 
(ii) identifying process parameters that could affect the critical 
quality attributes of the API; and 
(iii) determining the range for each critical process parameter 
expected to be used during routine manufacturing and 
process control. 
12.1.3. Validation sh all extend to those operations determined to be 
critical to the quality and purity of the API. 
12.2. Validation documentation- 
12.2.1. A written validation protocol shall be established that speciﬁes 
how validation of a particular process will be conducted. The 
protocol shall be reviewed and approved by the quality units 
and other designated units. 
12.2.2. The validation protocol shall specify cr itical process steps and 
acceptance criteria as well as the type of validation to be 
conducted (e.g. retrospective, prospective or concurrent) and 
the number of process runs. 
12.2.3. A validation report that cross -references the validation protocol 
shall be prepar ed, summarising the results obtained, 
commenting on any deviations observed and drawing the 
appropriate conclusions, including recommen ding changes to 
correct deﬁciencies. 
12.2.4. Any variations from the validation protocol shall be 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
documented with appropriate justiﬁcation. 
12.3. Qualiﬁcation- 
12.3.1. Before starting process validation activities, appropriate 
qualiﬁcation of critical equipment and ancillary sy stems shall 
be completed. Qualiﬁcation is usually carried out by conducting 
the following activities, individually or combined:- 
(i) Design Qualiﬁcation (DQ): documented veriﬁcation that the 
proposed design of the facilities, equipment or systems is 
suitable for the intended purpose; 
(ii) Installation Qualiﬁcation (IQ): documented veriﬁcation that 
the equipment or systems, as installed or modiﬁed, comply 
with the approved design, the manufacturer’s 
recommendations and user requirements; 
(iii) Operational Qualiﬁcation (OQ) : documented veriﬁcation 
that the equipment or systems, as installed or modiﬁed, 
perform as intended throughout the anticipated operating 
ranges; 
(iv) Performance Qualiﬁcation (PQ): documented veriﬁcation 
that the equipment and ancillary systems, as connected 
together, can perform effectively and reproducibly based on 
the approved process method and speciﬁcations. 
12.4. Approaches to process validation- 
12.4.1. Process Validation (PV) is the documented evidence that the 
process, operated within established parameters, can p erform 
effectively and reproducibly to produce an intermediate or API 
meeting its predetermined speciﬁcations and quality attributes. 
12.4.2. There are three approaches to validation. Prospective validation 
is the preferred approach, but there are exceptions where the 
other approaches can be used. These three approaches and their 
applicability are outlined in the following paragraph. 
12.4.3. Prospective validation shall normally be performed for all API 
processes referred to in paragraph 12.1.3. Prospective 
validation perf ormed on an API process shall be completed 
before the commercial distribution of the FPP manufactured 
from that API. 
12.4.4. Concurrent validation can be conducted when data from 
replicate production runs are unavailable because only a 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
limited number of API batche s have been produced, API 
batches are produced infrequently, or API batches are produced 
by a validated process that has been modiﬁed. Prior to the 
completion of concurrent validation, batches can be released 
and used in FPPs for commercial distribution ba sed on 
thorough monitoring and testing of the API batches. 
12.4.5. An exception can be made for retrospective validation for well- 
established processes that have been used without signiﬁcant 
changes to API quality due to changes in raw materials, 
equipment, syste ms, facilities or the production process. This 
validation approach may be used where- 
(a) critical quality attributes and critical process parameters 
have been identiﬁed; 
(b) appropriate in-process acceptance criteria and controls have 
been established; 
(c) there have not been signiﬁcant process or product failures 
attributable to causes other than operator error or equipment 
failures unrelated to equipment suitability; and 
(d) impurity proﬁles have been established for the existing API. 
12.4.6. Batches selected for retrospective validation shall be 
representative of all batches made during the review period, 
including any batches that failed to meet speciﬁcations, and 
shall be sufﬁcient in number to demonstrate process 
consistency. Retained samples can be tested to obtain data to 
retrospectively validate the process. 
12.5. Process validation programme- 
12.5.1. The number of process runs for validation shall depend on the 
complexity of the process or the magnitude of the process 
change being considered. For prospective and concurrent 
validation, three consecutive successful production batches 
shall be used as a guide, but there may be situations where 
additional process runs are warranted to prove consistency of 
the process (e.g., complex API processes or API processes with 
prolonged completion ti mes). Generally, for retrospective 
validation, data from ten to thirty consecutive batches shall be 
examined to assess process consistency, but fewer batches can 
be examined, if justiﬁed. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
12.5.2. Critical process parameters shall be controlled and monitored 
during process validation studies. Process parameters unrelated 
to quality, such as variables controlled to minimise energy 
consumption or equipment use, need not be included in the 
process validation. 
12.5.3. Process validation shall conﬁrm that the impurity proﬁle for 
each API is within the limits speciﬁed. The impurity proﬁle 
shall be comparable to or better than historical data and, where 
applicable, the proﬁle determined during process development 
or for batches used for pivotal clinical and toxicological 
studies. 
12.6. Periodic review of validated systems - Systems and processes shall 
be periodically evaluated to verify that they are still operating in a 
valid manner. Where no signiﬁcant changes have been made to the 
system or process, and a quality review conﬁrms that the system or 
process is consistently producing material meeting its speciﬁcations, 
there is normally no need for revalidation. 
12.7. Cleaning validation- 
12.7.1. Cleaning procedures shall normally be validated. In general, 
cleaning validation shall be directed to those si tuations or 
process steps where contamination or carry -over of materials 
poses the greatest risk to API quality. For example, in early 
production it may be unnecessary to validate equipment 
cleaning procedures where residues are removed by subsequent 
puriﬁcation steps. 
12.7.2. Validation of cleaning procedures shall reﬂect actual equipment 
usage patterns. If various APIs or intermediates are 
manufactured in the same equipment and the equipment is 
cleaned by the same process, a representative intermediate or 
API can be selected for cleaning validation. This selection shall 
be based on the solubility and difﬁculty of cleaning and the 
calculation of residue limits based on potency, toxicity and 
stability. 
12.7.3. The cleaning validation protocol shall describe the equipment 
to be cleaned, procedures, materials, acceptable cleaning levels, 
parameters to be monitored and controlled and analytical 
methods. The protocol shall also indicate the type of samples to 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
be obtained and how they are collected and labelled. 
12.7.4. Sampling shall in clude swabbing, rinsing or alternative 
methods (e.g., direct extraction), as appropriate, to detect both 
insoluble and soluble residues. The sampling methods used 
shall be capable of quantitatively measuring levels of residues 
remaining on the equipment su rfaces after cleaning. Swab 
sampling may be impractical when product contact surfaces are 
not easily accessible due to equipment design or process 
limitations (e.g., inner surfaces of hoses, transfer pipes, reactor 
tanks with small ports for handling toxic materials and small 
intricate equipment such as micronisers and microﬂuidisers). 
12.7.5. Validated analytical methods with the sensitivity to detect 
residues or contaminants shall be used. The detection limit for 
each analytical method shall be sufﬁciently sensit ive to detect 
the established acceptable level of the residue or contaminant. 
The method’s attainable recovery level shall be established. 
Residue limits shall be practical, achievable and veriﬁable and 
be based on the most deleterious residue. Limits can be 
established based on the minimum known pharmacological, 
toxicological or physiological activity of the API or its most 
deleterious component. 
12.7.6. Equipment cleaning or sanitisation studies shall address 
microbiological and endotoxin contamination for those 
processes where there is a need to reduce total microbiological 
count or endotoxins in the API, or other processes where such 
contamination could be of concern (e.g., non -sterile APIs used 
to manufacture sterile products). 
12.7.7. Cleaning procedures shall be monitored at appropriate intervals 
after validation to ensure that these procedures are effective 
when used during routine production. Equipment cleanliness 
can be monitored by analytical testing and visual examination, 
where feasible. Visual inspection can al low detection of gross 
contamination concentrated in small areas that could otherwise 
remain undetected by sampling or analysis or both. 
12.8. Validation of analytical methods- 
12.8.1. Analytical methods shall be validated unless the method 
employed is included in the r elevant pharmacopoeia or other 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
recognised standard reference. The suitability of all testing 
methods used shall nonetheless be veriﬁed under actual 
conditions of use and documented. 
12.8.2. Methods shall be validated to include consideration of 
characteristics included within the ICH guidelines on validation 
of analytical methods. The degree of analytical validation 
performed shall reﬂect the purpose of the analysis and the stage 
of the API production process. 
12.8.3. Appropriate qualiﬁcation of analytical equipment shall be 
considered before starting validation of analytical methods. 
12.8.4. Complete records shall be maintained of any modiﬁcation of a 
validated analytical method. Such records shall include the 
reason for the modiﬁcation and appropriate data to verify that 
the modi ﬁcation produces results that are as accurate and 
reliable as the established method. 

13. Change control: 
13.1. A formal change control system shall be established to evaluate all 
changes that may affect the production and control of the intermediate 
or API. 
13.2. Written procedures shall cover the identiﬁcation, documentation, 
appropriate review and approval of changes in raw materials, 
speciﬁcations, analytical methods, facilities, support systems, 
equipment (including computer hardware), processing steps, labelling 
and packaging materials and computer software. 
13.3. Any proposals for relevant changes to GMP shall be drafted, reviewed 
and approved by the appropriate organisational units and reviewed 
and approved by the quality units. 
13.4. The potential impact of the proposed chang e on the quality of the 
intermediate or API shall be evaluated. A classiﬁcation procedure may 
help in determining the level of testing, validation and documentation 
needed to justify changes to a validated process. Changes can be 
classiﬁed (e.g., as minor or major) depending on their nature and 
extent and the effects these changes may have on the process. 
Scientiﬁc judgement shall be used to determine what additional testing 
and validation studies are appropriate to justify a change in a validated 
process. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
13.5. When implementing approved changes, measures shall be taken to 
ensure that all documents affected by the changes are revised. 
13.6. After the change has been implemented there shall be an evaluation of 
the ﬁrst batch produced or tested under the change. 
13.7. The potential for critical changes to affect established retest or expiry 
dates shall be evaluated. If necessary, samples of the intermediate or 
API produced by the modiﬁed process can be placed on an accelerated 
stability programme or can be added to the stabilit y monitoring 
programme. 
13.8. Manufacturers of the current dosage form shall be notiﬁed of changes 
from established production and process control procedures that can 
impact the quality of the API. 

14. Rejection and reuse of materials:- 
14.1. Rejection- Intermediates and APIs failing to meet established 
speciﬁcations shall be identiﬁed as such and quarantined. These 
intermediates or APIs can be reprocessed or reworked as described 
below. The ﬁnal disposition of rejected materials shall be recorded. 
14.2. Reprocessing- 
14.2.1. Introducing an intermediate or API, including the one that does 
not conform to standards or speciﬁcations, back into the 
process and reprocessing by repeating a crystallisation step or 
other appropriate chemical or physical manipulation steps (e.g., 
distillation, ﬁltration, chromatography or milling) that are part 
of the established manufacturing process is generally 
considered acceptable. However, if such reprocessing is used 
for a majority of batches it shall be included as part of the 
standard manufacturing process. 
14.2.2. Continuation of a process step after an in -process control test 
has shown that the step is incomplete is considered to be part of 
the normal process. This is not considered to be reprocessing. 
14.2.3. Introducing unreacted material back into a process and 
repeating a chemical reaction is considered to be reprocessing 
unless it is part of the established process. Such reprocessing 
shall be preceded by careful evaluation to ensure that the 
quality of the intermediate or API is not adversely affected due 
to the po tential formation of by -products and overreacted 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
materials. 
14.3. Reworking- 
14.3.1. Before a decision is taken to rework batches that do not 
conform to the established standards or speciﬁcations, an 
investigation into the reason for non -conformance shall be 
performed. 
14.3.2. Batches that have been reworked shall be subjected to 
appropriate evalu ation, testing, stability testing if warranted 
and documentation to show that the reworked product is of 
equivalent quality to that produced by the original process. 
Concurrent validation is often the appropriate validation 
approach for rework procedures. This allows a protocol to 
deﬁne the rework procedure, how it will be carried out and the 
expected results. If there is only one batch to be reworked, then 
a report can be written and the batch released once it is found 
to be acceptable. 
14.3.3. Procedures shall pr ovide for comparing the impurity proﬁle of 
each reworked batch with batches manufactured by the 
established process. Where routine analytical methods are 
inadequate to characterise the reworked batch, additional 
methods shall be used. 
14.4. Recovery of materials and solvents- 
14.4.1. Recovery (e.g., from mother liquor or ﬁltrates) of reactants, 
intermediates or the API is considered acceptable, provided that 
approved procedures exist for the recovery and the recovered 
materials meet speciﬁcations suitable for their intended use. 
14.4.2. Solvents can be recovered and reused in the same processes or 
in different processes, provided that the recovery procedures 
are controlled and monitored to ensure that solvents meet 
appropriate standards before reuse or comingling with other 
approved materials. 
14.4.3. Fresh and recovered solvents and reagents can be combined, if 
adequate testing has shown their suitability for all 
manufacturing processes in which they may be used. 
14.4.4. The use of recovered solvents, mother liquors and other 
recovered materials shall be adequately documented. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
14.5. Returns- 
14.5.1. Returned intermediates or APIs shall be identiﬁed as such and 
quarantined. 
14.5.2. If the conditions under which returned intermediates or APIs 
have been stored or shipped before or during their return or the 
condition of their containers casts doubt on their quality, the 
returned intermediates or APIs shall be reprocessed, reworked 
or destroyed, as appropriate. 
14.5.3. Records of returned intermediates or APIs shall be maintained. 
For each return, documentation shall include- 
(i) name and address of the consignee; 
(ii) intermediate or API, batch number and quantity returned; 
(iii) reasons for return; and 
(iv) use or disposal of the returned intermediate or API. 

15. Complaints and recalls- 
15.1. All quality-related complaints, whether received orally or in wri ting, 
shall be recorded and investigated according to the written procedure. 
15.2. Complaint records shall include- 
(i) name and address of complainant; 
(ii) name (where appropriate title) and telephone number of person 
submitting the complaint; 
(iii) nature of the complaint ( including name and batch number of 
the API); 
(iv) date on which the complaint was received; 
(v) action initially taken (including dates and identity of person 
taking the action); 
(vi) any follow-up action taken; 
(vii) response provided to the originator of the complaint (including 
date on which the response was sent); and 
(viii) ﬁnal decision on intermediate or API batch or lot. 
15.3. Records of complaints shall be retained in order to evaluate trends, 
product-related frequencies and severity with a view to taking 
additional, and if appropriate, immediate corrective action. 
15.4. There shall be a written procedure that deﬁnes the circumstances 
under which a recall of an intermediate or API shall be considered. 
15.5. The recall procedure shall designate who shall be involved in 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
evaluating the informatio n, how a recall shall be initiated, who shall 
be informed about the recall and how the recalled material shall be 
treated. 
15.6. The recalls shall be informed to the Licencing Authorities. 

16. Contract manufacturers (including laboratories):- 
16.1. All contract manufactu rers (including laboratories) shall comply with 
GMP deﬁned in this Schedule. Special consideration shall be given to 
the prevention of cross-contamination and to maintaining traceability. 
16.2. Contract manufacturers (including laboratories) shall be evaluated by 
the contract giver to ensure GMP compliance of the speciﬁc operations 
taking place at the contract sites. 
16.3. There shall be a written and approved contract or formal agreement 
between the contract giver and the contract acceptor that deﬁnes in 
detail the GMP responsibilities, including the quality m easures, of 
each party. 
16.4. The contract shall permit the contract giver to audit the contract 
acceptor’s facilities for compliance with GMP. 
16.5. Where sub-contracting is allowed, the contract acceptor shall not pass 
to a third party any of the work entrusted to h im or her under the 
contract without the contract giver’s prior evaluation and approval of 
the arrangements. 
16.6. Manufacturing and laboratory records shall be kept at the site where 
the activity takes place and be readily available. 
16.7. Changes in the process, equ ipment, test methods, speciﬁcations or 
other contractual requirements shall not be made unless the contract 
giver is informed and approves the changes. 

17. Speciﬁc guidance for APIs manufactured by cell culture or 
fermentation:- 
17.1. General- 
17.1.1. The principles of fer mentation for “classical” processes for 
production of small molecules and for processes using 
recombinant and non-recombinant organisms for production of 
proteins or polypeptides or both are the same, although the 
degree of control will differ. Where pract ical, this Part shall 
address these differences. In general, the degree of control for 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
biotechnological processes used to produce proteins and 
polypeptides is greater than that for classical fermentation 
processes. 
17.1.2. The term “bio-technological process” (biotech) refers to the use 
of cells or organisms that have been generated or modiﬁed by 
recombinant DNA, hybridoma or other technology to produce 
APIs. The APIs produced by bio -technological processes 
normally consist of high molecular weight substances, such as 
proteins and polypeptides, for which speciﬁc guidance is given 
in this Part. Certain APIs of low molecular weight, such as 
antibiotics, amino acids, vitamins, and carbohydrates can also 
be produced by recombinant DNA technology. The level of 
control for these types of APIs is similar to that employed for 
classical fermentation. 
17.1.3. The term “classical fermentation” refers to the processes that 
use microorganisms existing in nature or modiﬁed by 
conventional methods (e.g., irradiation or chemical 
mutagenesis) to produce APIs. APIs produced by “classical 
fermentation” are normally low molecular weight products 
such as antibiotics, amino acids, vitamins, and carbohydrates. 
17.1.4. Production of APIs or intermediates from cell culture or 
fermentation involves biological processes such as cultivation 
of cells or extraction and puriﬁcation of material from living 
organisms. There may be additional process steps, such as 
physicochemical modiﬁcation, that are part of the 
manufacturing process. The raw materials used (media, buffer 
components) may provide the potential for growth of 
microbiological contaminants. Depending on the source, 
method of preparation and the intended use of the API or 
intermediate, control of bioburden, viral contamination and 
endotoxins during manufacturing and monitoring of the process 
at appropriate stages may be necessary. 
17.1.5. Appropriate controls shall be established at all stages of 
manufacturing to assure intermediate or API quality. This starts 
at the cell culture or fermentation step, prior steps (e.g., cell 
banking) shall be performed under appropriate process 
controls. This covers cell culture or fermentation from the point 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
at which a vial of the cell bank is retrieved for use in 
manufacturing. 
17.1.6. Appropriate equipment and environmental controls sha ll be 
used to minimise the risk of contamination. The acceptance 
criteria for quality of the environment and the frequency of 
monitoring shall depend on the step in production and the 
production conditions (open, closed or contained systems). 
17.1.7. In general, process controls shall take into account- 
(i) maintenance of the working cell bank (where appropriate); 
(ii) proper inoculation and expansion of the culture; 
(iii) control of the critical operating parameters during 
fermentation or cell culture; 
(iv) monitoring of the process for cell growth, viability (for most 
cell culture processes) and productivity where 
appropriate; 
(v) harvest and puriﬁcation procedures that remove cells, 
cellular debris and media components while protecting 
the intermediate or API from contamination (particularly 
of a microbiological nature) and from loss of quality; 
(vi) monitoring of bioburden and, where n eeded, endotoxin 
levels at appropriate stages of production; and 
(vii) viral safety concerns as described in ICH Guideline Q5A (2) 
[Viral safety evaluation of biotechnology products 
derived from cell lines of human or animal origin]. 
17.1.8. Where appropriate, the removal of media components, host cell 
proteins, other process -related impurities, product -related 
impurities and contaminants shall be demonstrated. 
17.2. Cell bank maintenance and record keeping- 
17.2.1. Access to cell banks shall be limited to authorised personnel. 
17.2.2. Cell b anks shall be maintained under storage conditions 
designed to maintain viability and prevent contamination. 
17.2.3. Records of the use of the vials from the cell banks and storage 
conditions shall be maintained. 
17.2.4. Where appropriate, cell banks shall be periodically monitored to 
determine suitability for use. 
17.3. Cell culture or fermentation- 
17.3.1. Where aseptic addition of cell substrates, media, buffers and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
gases is needed, closed or contained systems shall be used 
where possible. If the inoculations of the initial vessel or 
subsequent transfers or additions (media, buffers) are performed 
in open vessels, there shall be controls and procedures in place 
to minimise the risk of contamination. 
17.3.2. Where the quality of the API can be affected by microbial 
contamination, manipulations using open vessels shall be 
performed in a biosafety cabinet or similarly controlled 
environment. 
17.3.3. Personnel shall be appropriately gowned and take special 
precautions handling the cultures. 
17.3.4. Critical operating parameters (for example temperature, pH, 
agitation rates, addition of gases and pressure) shall be 
monitored to ensure consistency with the established process. 
Cell growth, viability (for most cell culture processes), and, 
where appropriate, productivity shall also be monitored. Critical 
parameters wi ll vary from one process to another, and for 
classical fermentation, certain parameters (cell viability) may 
not need to be monitored. 
17.3.5. Cell culture equipment shall be cleaned and sterilised after use. 
As appropriate, fermentation equipment shall be cleaned , and 
sanitized or sterilised. 
17.3.6. Culture media shall be sterilised before use when appropriate to 
protect the quality of the API. 
17.3.7. There shall be appropriate procedures in place to detect 
contamination and determine the course of action to be taken. 
This shal l include procedures to determine the impact of the 
contamination on the product and those to decontaminate the 
equipment and return it to a condition to be used in subsequent 
batches. Foreign organisms observed during fermentation 
processes shall be ident iﬁed as appropriate and the effect of 
their presence on product quality shall be assessed, if necessary. 
The results of such assessments shall be taken into 
consideration in the disposition of the material produced. 
17.3.8. Records of contamination events shall be maintained. 
17.3.9. Shared (multiproduct) equipment may warrant additional 
testing after cleaning between product campaigns, as 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
appropriate, to minimise the risk of cross-contamination. 
17.4. Harvesting, isolation and puriﬁcation- 
17.4.1. Harvesting steps, either to remove cel ls or cellular components 
or to collect cellular components after disruption, shall be 
performed in equipment and areas designed to minimise the 
risk of contamination. 
17.4.2. Harvest and puriﬁcation procedures that remove or inactivate 
the producing organism, cel lular debris and media components 
(while minimising degradation, contamination and loss of 
quality) shall be adequate to ensure that the intermediate or API 
is recovered with consistent quality. 
17.4.3. All equipment shall be properly cleaned and as appropriate, 
sanitised after use. Multiple successive batching without 
cleaning can be used if intermediate or API quality is not 
compromised. 
17.4.4. If open systems are used, puriﬁcation shall be performed under 
environmental conditions appropriate for the preservation of 
product quality. 
17.4.5. Additional controls, such as the use of dedicated 
chromatography resins or additional testing, may be 
appropriate, if equipment is to be used for multiple products. 
17.5. Viral removal or inactivation steps: 
17.5.1. Viral removal and viral inactivation steps are critical 
processing steps for some processes and shall be performed 
within their validated parameters. 
17.5.2. Appropriate precautions shall be taken to prevent potential viral 
contamination from pre -viral to post -viral removal or 
inactivation steps. Therefore, open processing shall be 
performed in areas that are separate from other processing 
activities and have separate air handling units. 
17.5.3. The same equipment is not normally used for different 
puriﬁcation steps. However, if the same equipment is to be 
used, the equipment shall be appropriately cleaned and 
sanitised before reuse. Appropriate precautions shall be taken 
to prevent poten tial virus carry -over (e.g., through equipment 
or environment) from previous steps. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
18. APIs for use in clinical trials:- 
18.1. General- 
18.1.1. Not all the controls in the previous sections of this guide are 
appropriate for the manufacture of a new API for 
investigational use during its development. 
18.1.2. The controls used in the manufacture of APIs for use in clinical 
trials shall be consistent with the stage of development of the 
pharmaceutical product incorporating the API. Process and test 
procedures shall be ﬂexible to allow for changes to be made as 
knowledge of the process increases and clinical testing of a 
pharmaceutical product progresses from the preclinical stages 
through the clinical stages. Once pharmaceutical development 
reaches the stage where the API is produced for use in 
pharmaceutical products intended for clinical trials, 
manufacturers shall ensure that APIs are manufactured in 
suitable facilities using app ropriate production and control 
procedures to ensure the quality of the API. 
18.2. Quality- 
18.2.1. Appropriate GMP concepts shall be applied in the production 
of APIs for use in clinical trials with a suitable mechanism for 
the approval of each batch. 
18.2.2. A quality unit independent from production shall be established 
for the approval or rejection of each batch of API for use in 
clinical trials. 
18.2.3. Some of the testing functions commonly performed by the 
quality units can be performed within other organisational 
units. 
18.2.4. Quality measures shall include a system for testing of raw 
materials, packaging materials, intermediates and APIs. 
18.2.5. Process and quality problems shall be evaluated. 
18.2.6. Labelling for APIs intended for use in clinical trials shall be 
appropriately controlled and shall identify the material as being 
for investigational use. 
18.3. Equipment and facilities- 
18.3.1. During all phases of clinical development, including the use of 
small-scale facilities or laboratories to manufacture batches of 
APIs for use in clinical trials, procedures sh all be in place to 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
ensure that equipment is calibrated, clean and suitable for its 
intended use. 
18.3.2. Procedures for the use of facilities shall ensure that materials 
are handled in a manner that minimises the risk of 
contamination and cross- contamination. 
18.4. Control of raw materials- 
18.4.1. Raw materials used in production of APIs for use in clinical 
trials shall be evaluated by testing or be received with a 
supplier’s analysis and subjected to identity testing. When a 
material is considered hazardous a supplier’s analy sis shall be 
sufﬁce. 
18.4.2. In some instances the suitability of a raw material can be 
determined before use based on acceptability in small -scale 
reactions (i.e., use testing) rather than on analytical testing 
alone. 
18.5. Production- 
18.5.1. The production of APIs for use in clinical trials shall be 
documented in laboratory notebooks, batch records or by other 
appropriate means. These documents shall include information 
on the use of production materials, equipment, processing and 
scientiﬁc observations. 
18.5.2. Expected yields can be more variable and less deﬁned than the 
expected yields used in commercial processes. Investigations 
into yield variations are not expected. 
18.6. Validation- 
18.6.1. Process validation for the production of APIs for use in clinical 
trials is normally inappropriate whe re a single API batch is 
produced or where process changes during development of an 
API make batch replication difﬁcult or inexact. The 
combination of controls, calibration and where appropriate, 
equipment qualiﬁcation assures quality of the API during thi s 
development phase. 
18.6.2. Process validation shall be conducted in accordance with 
paragraph 12 when batches are produced for commercial use, 
even when such batches are produced on a pilot scale or small 
scale. 
18.7. Changes- Changes are expected during development a s knowledge is 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
gained and the production is scaled up. Every change in the 
production, speciﬁcations or test procedures shall be adequately 
recorded. 
18.8. Laboratory controls- 
18.8.1. While analytical methods performed to evaluate a batch of API 
for clinical trials may not yet be validated they shall be 
scientiﬁcally sound. 
18.8.2. A system for retaining reserve samples of all batches shall be 
in place. This system shall ensure that a sufﬁcient quantity of 
each reserve sample is retained for an appropriate length of 
time after approval, termination or discontinuation of an 
application. 
18.8.3. Expiry and retest dating as referred to in paragraph 11.5 
applies to existing APIs used in clinical trials. For new APIs 
paragraph 11.5 does not normally apply in early stages of 
clinical trials. 
18.9. Documentation- 
18.9.1. A system shall be in place to ensure that information gained 
during the development and the manufacture of APIs for use in 
clinical trials is documented and available. 
18.9.2. The development and implementation of the analytical 
methods used to supp ort the release of a batch of API for use 
in clinical trials shall be appropriately documented. 
18.9.3. A system for retaining production and control records and 
documents shall be used. This system shall ensure that records 
and documents are retained for an appro priate length of time 
after the approval, termination or discontinuation of an 
application. 
PART XIII 
REQUIREMENTS OF PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 
1. External preparations:- The following equipment is recommended for the 
manufacture of ‘External preparations’, i.e., O intments, Emulsions, Lotions, 
Solutions, Pastes, Creams, Dusting Powders and such identical products 
used for external applications whichever is applicable, namely:- 
(1) Mixing and storage tanks preferably of stainless steel or any other 
appropriate material; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(2) Jacketed Kettle stainless steel container (steam, gas or electrically 
heated); 
(3) Mixer (Electrically operated); 
(4) Planetary mixer; 
(5) A colloid mill or a suitable emulsifier; 
(6) A triple roller mill or an ointment mill; 
(7) Liquid filling equipment (Electrically operated); and 
(8) Jar or tube filling equipment. 
Area- A minimum area of thirty square meters for basic installation and ten 
square meters for ancillary area is recommended. 
2. Oral Liquid Preparations:- The following equipment is recommended for 
the manufacture of ora l or internal use preparations, i.e., Syrups, Elixirs, 
Emulsions and Suspensions, whichever is applicable, namely- 
(1) Mixing and storage tanks preferably of Stainless steel or any other 
appropriate material; 
(2) Jacketed Kettle or Stainless steel tank (steam, gas or electrically heated); 
(3) Portable stirrer (Electrically operated); 
(4) A colloid mill or suitable emulsifier (Electrically operated); 
(5) Suitable filtration equipment (Electrically operated); 
(6) Semi-automatic or automatic bottle filling machine; 
(7) Pilfer proof cap sealing machine; 
(8) Water distillation unit or deionizer; and 
(9) Clarity testing inspection units. 
Area- A minimum area of thirty square meters for basic installation and ten 
square meters for ancillary area is recommended. 
3. Tablets- The Tablet section shall be free from dust and floating particles and 
may be air -conditioned. For this purpose, each tablet compression machine 
shall be isolated into cubicles and connected to a vacuum dust collector or 
an exhaust system. For effective operations, the tablet productio n 
department shall be divided into four distinct and separate sections as 
follows:- 
(a) Mixing, Granulation and Drying section; 
(b) Tablet compression section; 
(c) Packaging section (strip or blister machine wherever required); and 
(d) Coating section (wherever required). 

3.1. The following electrically operated equipment are recommended for 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
the manufacture of compressed tablets and hypodermic tablets, 
namely:- 
(a) Granulation-cum-Drying section- 
(1) Disintegrator and sifter; 
(2) Powder mixer; 
(3) Mass mixer or Planetary mixer or Rapid mixer granulator; 
(4) Granulator wherever required; 
(5) Thermostatically controlled hot air oven with trays (preferably 
mounted on a trolley) or Fluid bed dryer; and 
(6) Weighing machines; 
(b) Compression section- 
(1) Tablet compression machine, single or multi punch or rotatory; 
(2) Punch and dies storage cabinets; 
(3) Tablet de-duster; 
(4) Tablet Inspection unit or belt; 
(5) Dissolution test apparatus wherever required; 
(6) In-process testing equipment like single pan electronic balance, 
hardness tester, friability and disintegration test apparatus; and 
(7) Air-conditioning and dehumidification arrangement (wherever 
necessary). 
(c) Packaging section- 
(1) Strip or blister packaging machine; 
(2) Leak test apparatus (vacuum system); 
(3) Tablet counters (wherever applicable); and 
(4) Air-conditioning and dehumidification arrange ment (wherever 
applicable). 
Area- A minimum area of sixty square meters for basic installation 
and twenty square meters for ancillary area is recommended for 
un-coated tablets. 
(d) Coating section- 
(1) Jacketed kettle stainless steel container or any other appropr iate 
material (steam, gas or electrically heated for preparing coating 
suspension); 
(2) Coating pan (Stainless steel); 
(3) Polishing pan (where applicable); 
(4) Exhaust system (including vacuum dust collector); 
(5) Air conditioning and Dehumidification Arrangement; and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(6) Weighing machine. 
3.2. The coating section shall be made dust free with suitable exhaust 
system to remove excess powder and fumes resulting from solvent 
evaporation. It shall be air -conditioned and dehumidified, wherever 
considered necessary. 

Area- A minimum additional area of thirty square meters for coating section 
for basic installation and ten square meters for ancillary area is 
recommended. Separate area and equipment for mixing, granulation, drying, 
tablet compression, coating and packing shall be provided for Penicillin 
group of drugs on the lines indicated above. In case of operations involving 
dust and floating particles, care shall be exercised to avoid cross -
contamination. 

3.3. The manufacture of Hypodermic tablets shall be conducted under 
aseptic condition s in a separate air -conditioned room, the walls of 
which shall be smooth and washable. The granulation, compression 
and packing shall be done in this room. 
3.4. The manufacture of effervescent and soluble tablets shall be carried 
out in air-conditioned and dehumidified areas. 

4. Powders:- The following equipment is recommended for the manufacture of 
powders, namely:- 
(1) Disintegrator; 
(2) Mixer (electrically operated); 
(3) Sifter; 
(4) Stainless steel vessels and scoops of suitable sizes; 
(5) Filling equipment; and 
(6) Weighing machine. 

In the case of operation involving floating particles of fine powder, a suitable 
exhaust system shall be provided. Workers shall be provided with suitable 
masks during operation. 

Area- A minimum area of thirty square meters is recommended to allow for 
the basic installations. Where the actual blending is to be done on the 
premises, an additional room shall be provided for the purpose. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
5. Capsules:- For the manufacture of capsules, separate enclosed area suitably 
air-conditioned and dehumidified with an airlo ck arrangement shall be 
provided. The following equipment is recommended for filling Hard Gelatin 
Capsules, namely:- 
(1) Mixing and blending equipment (electrically or power driven); 
(2) Capsule filling units; 
(3) Capsules counters (wherever applicable); 
(4) Weighing machine; 
(5) Disintegration test apparatus; and 
(6) Capsule polishing equipment. 
Separate equipment and filling and packaging areas shall be provided in 
penicillin and non-penicillin sections. In case of operations involving floating 
particles of fine powder, a suitab le exhaust system shall be provided. 
Manufacture and filling shall be carried out in air -conditioned areas. The 
room shall be dehumidified. 
Area- A minimum area of twenty -five square meters for basic installation 
and ten square meters for ancillary area each for penicillin and non-penicillin 
sections is recommended. 
6. Surgical dressing - The following equipment is recommended for the 
manufacture of surgical dressings other than Absorbent Cotton Wool, 
namely- 
(1) Rolling machine; 
(2) Trimming machine; 
(3) Cutting equipment; 
(4) Folding and pressing machine for gauze; 
(5) Mixing tanks for processing medicated dressing; 
(6) Hot air dry oven; 
(7) Steam steriliser or dry heat steriliser or other suitable equipment; and 
(8) Work tables and benches for different operations. 
Area- A minimum area of thirty square meters is recommended to allow for 
the basic installations. In case medicated dressings are to be manufactured, 
another room with a minimum area of thirty square meters shall be 
provided. 
7. Ophthalmic preparations: - For the manufacture of ophth almic 
preparations, separate enclosed areas with air lock arrangement shall be 
provided. The following equipment is recommended for manufacture under 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
aseptic conditions of Eye Ointment, Eye lotions and other preparations for 
external use, namely- 
(1) Thermostatically controlled hot air ovens (preferably double ended); 
(2) Jacketed kettle or Stainless steel tanks (steam, gas or electrically heated); 
(3) Mixing and storage tanks of stainless steel or Planetary mixer; 
(4) Colloid mill or ointment mill; 
(5) Tube filling and crimping equipment (semi-automatic or automatic filling 
machines); 
(6) Tube cleaning equipment (air jet type); 
(7) Tube washing and drying equipment, if required; 
(8) Automatic vial washing machine; 
(9) Vial drying oven; 
(10) Rubber bung washing machine; 
(11) Sintered glass funnel, Seitz filter or filter candle (preferably cartridge and 
membrane filters); 
(12) Liquid filling equipment (semi-automatic or automatic filling machines); 
(13) Autoclave (preferably ventilator autoclave); 
(14) Air-conditioning and dehumidification arrangement (preferably centra lly 
air-conditioned and dehumidification system); and 
(15) Laminar air flow units. 
Area: (1) A minimum area of twenty -five square meters for basic 
installation and ten square meters for ancillary area is recommended. 
Manufacture and filling shall be carried out in air-conditioned areas under 
aseptic conditions. The rooms shall be further dehumidified as considered 
necessary, if preparations containing antibiotics are manufactured. 
(2) Areas for formulations meant for external use and internal use shall be 
separately provided to avoid mix up. 
8. Pessaries and Suppositories:- 
(1) The following equipment is recommended for manufacture of Pessaries 
and Suppositories, namely- 
(i) Mixing and pouring equipment; 
(ii) Moulding equipment; and 
(iii) Weighing machine. 
Area- A minimum area of twenty square meters is recommended to allow 
for the basic installation. 
(2) In the case of pessaries manufactured by granulation and compression, 
the requirements as indicated under “item 3 of Tablet” shall be provided. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
9. Inhalers and Vitrallae: - The following equ ipment is recommended for 
manufacture of Inhalers and Vitrallae, namely- 
(1) Mixing equipment; 
(2) Graduated delivery equipment for measurement of the medicament 
during filling; and 
(3) Sealing equipment. 
Area: An area of minimum twenty square metres is recommended fo r the 
basic installations. 
10. Repacking of drugs and pharmaceutical chemicals: - The following 
equipment is recommended for repacking of drugs and pharmaceuticals, 
chemicals, namely:— 
(1) Powder disintegrator; 
(2) Powder sifter (Electrically operated); 
(3) Stainless steel scoops and vessels of suitable sizes; 
(4) Weighing and measuring equipment; 
(5) Filling equipment (semi-automatic or automatic machine); and 
(6) Electric sealing machine. 
Area- An area of minimum thirty square metres is recommended for the 
basic installation. In case of operations involving floating particles of fine 
powder, a suitable exhaust system shall be provided. 
11. Parenteral Preparations: - The whole operation of manufacture of 
parenteral preparations (small volume injectables and large volume 
parenterals) in glass and plastic containers may be divided into the following 
separate areas or rooms, namely- 
11.1. Parenteral preparations in glass containers- 
(1) Water management area: This includes water treatment and 
storage; 
(2) Containers and closures preparation area: This includ es washing 
and drying of ampoules, vials, bottles and closures; 
(3) Solution preparation area: This includes preparation and filtration 
of solution; 
(4) Filling capping and sealing area: This includes filling and sealing 
of ampoules or filling, capping and sealing of vials and bottles; 
(5) Sterilisation area; 
(6) Quarantine area; 
(7) Visual inspection area; and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(8) Packaging area. 
The following equipment is recommended for different above mentioned 
areas, namely- 
1. Water management area- 
(1) Reverse Osmosis ( RO) or Electro -deionisation (EDI) water 
treatment unit; 
(2) Distillation (multi column with heat exchangers) unit; 
(3) Thermostatically controlled water storage tank; 
(4) Transfer pumps; and 
(5) Service lines for carrying water into user areas through 
continuously circulating pipe work loop. The Ma terial of 
Construction (MOC) for the storage tank and circulating pipe 
line shall be of SS-316 L Grade. 

2. Containers and closures preparation area- 
(1) Automatic rotary ampoule or vial or bottle washing machine 
having separate air, water, distilled water jets; 
(2) Automatic closures washing machine; 
(3) Storage equipment for ampoules, vials, bottles and closure; 
(4) Dryer or steriliser (double ended); 
(5) Dust proof storage cabinets; and 
(6) Stainless steel benches or stools. 

3. Solution preparation area- 
(1) Solution preparation and mix ing stainless steel tanks and other 
containers; 
(2) Portable stirrer; 
(3) Filtration equipment with cartridge and membrane filters or 
bacteriological filters; 
(4) Transfer pumps; and 
(5) Stainless steel benches or stools. 

4. Filling, capping and sealing area- 
(1) Automatic ampoule or vial or bottle filling, sealing and capping 
machine under laminar air flow work station; 
(2) Gas lines (Nitrogen, Oxygen and Carbon di -oxide), wherever 
required; and 
(3) Stainless steel benches or stools. 

5. Sterilisation area- 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(1) Steam steriliser (preferably wi th computer control for 
sterilisation cycle along with trolley sets for loading or 
unloading containers before and after sterilisation); 
(2) Hot Air steriliser (preferably double ended); and 
(3) Pressure leak test apparatus. 

6. Quarantine area- 
(1) Storage cabinets; and 
(2) Raised platforms or steel racks. 

7. Visual inspection area- 
(1) Visual inspection units (preferably conveyor belt type and 
composite white and black assembly supported with 
illumination); and 
(2) Stainless steel benches or stools. 

8. Packaging area- 
(1) Batch coding machine (preferably automatic); 
(2) Labeling unit (preferably conveyor belt type); and 
(3) benches or stools. 
Area: (1) A minimum area of one hundred and fifty square meters for 
the basic installation and an ancillary area of one hundred square meters 
for Small Volume Injectable are recommended. For Large Volume 
Parenterals, an area of one hundred and fifty square meters each for the 
basic installation and for ancillary area is recommended. These areas 
shall be partitioned into suitable enclosures with airlock arrangements. 
(2) Areas for formulations meant for external use and internal use shall 
be separately provided to avoid mix-up. 
(3) Packaging materials for large volume Parenteral shall have a 
minimum area of one hundred square meters. 

11.2. Parenteral preparations in p lastic containers by Form -Fill-Seal or 
Blow, Fill -Seal technology - The whole operation of manufacture of 
large volume parenteral preparations in plastic containers including 
plastic pouches by automatic (all operations in one station) Form -Fill-
Seal machin e or by semi -automatic blow moulding, filling -cum-
sealing machine may be divided into following separate areas or 
rooms, namely- 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(1) Water management area; 
(2) Solution preparation area; 
(3) Container moulding-cum-filling and sealing area; 
(4) Sterilisation area; 
(5) Quarantine area; 
(6) Visual inspection area; and 
(7) Packaging area. 

The following equipment is recommended for different above 
mentioned areas namely- 

1. Water management area- 
(1) RO or Electro-deionisation (EDI) water treatment unit; 
(2) Distillation unit (multi column with heat exchangers); 
(3) Thermostatically controlled water storage tank; 
(4) Transfer pumps; and 
(5) Service lines for carrying water into user areas through 
continuously circulating pipe work loop. The Material of 
Construction (MOC) for the storage tank and circulating 
pipe line shall be of SS-316 L Grade. 

2. Solution preparation area- 
(1) Solution preparation and storage tanks; 
(2) Transfer pumps; and 
(3) Cartridge and membrane filters. 
3. Container moulding-cum-filling and sealing area- 
(1) Sterile Form-Fill-Seal machine (all operations in on e station 
with built-in laminar air flow work station having integrated 
container output conveyor belt through pass box); and 
(2) Arrangement for feeding plastic granules through feeding -
cum-filling tank into the machine. 

4. Sterilisation area- Super heated steam steriliser (with computer 
control for sterilisation cycle along with trolley sets for loading 
or unloading containers for sterilisation). 

5. Quarantine area- Adequate number of platforms or racks with 
storage system. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6. Visual inspection area - Visual inspection unit (with conveyor 
belt and composite white and black assembly supported with 
illumination). 

7. Packaging area- 
(1) Pressure leak test apparatus (pressure belt or rotating disc 
type); 
(2) Batch coding machine (preferably automatic); and 
(3) Labeling unit (preferably conveyor belt type). 
Area: (1) A minimum area of two hundred and fifty square meters for 
the basic installation and an ancillary area of one hundred and fifty 
square meters for large volume parenteral preparations in plastic 
containers by Form-Fill-Seal technology is recommended. These areas 
shall be partitioned into suitable enclosures with air -lock 
arrangements. 
(2) Areas for formulations meant for external use and internal use shall 
be separately provided to avoid mix up. 
(3) Packaging materials for l arge volume Parenteral shall have a 
minimum area of one-hundred square meters. 

6. These rules shall come into force for implementation as under:— 

Category of manufacturers 
[Based on turnover (INR)] 
Time line for implementation 
Large manufacturers 
(Turnover>250 crores) 
Six months from the date of publication 
of these rules. 
Small and Medium manufacturers 
(Turnover ≤ 250 crores) 
Twelve months from the date of 
publication of these rules.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1249[SCHEDULE N 
[See rule 64(1)] 
LIST OF MINIMUM EQUIPMENT FOR THE EFFICIENT 
RUNNING OF A PHARMACY 
1. Entrance—The front of a pharmacy shall bear an inscription 
“Pharmacy" in front. 
2. Premises—The premises of a pharmacy shall be separated from rooms 
for private use. The premises shall be well -built, dry, well-lit and ventilated and 
of sufficient dimensions to allow the goods in stock, especially medicaments 
and poisons to be kept in a clearly visible and appropriate manner. The area of 
the section to be used as dispensing department shall be not less than 6 square 
metres for one pharmacist working therein with additional 2 square metre s for 
each additional pharmacist. The height of the premises shall be at least 2.5 
metres. 
The floor of the pharmacy shall be smooth and washable. The walls shall be 
plastered or tiled or oil painted so as to maintain smooth, durable and washable 
surface devoid of holes, cracks and crevices. 
A pharmacy shall be provided with ample supply of good quality water. 
The dispensing department shall be separated by a barrier to prevent the 
admission of the public. 
3. Furniture and apparatus —The furniture and appara tus of a pharmacy 
shall be adapted to the uses for which they are intended and correspond to the 
size and requirements to the establishment. 
Drugs, chemicals, and medicaments shall be kept in a room appropriate to 
their properties and in such special conta iners as will prevent any deterioration 
of the contents or of contents of containers kept near them. Drawers, glasses and 
other containers used for keeping medicaments shall be of suitable size and 
capable of being closed tightly to prevent the entry of dust. 
Every container shall bear a label of appropriate size, easily readable with 
names of medicaments as given in the Pharmacopoeias. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
A pharmacy shall be provided with dispensing bench, the top of which shall 
be covered with washable and impervious materia l like stainless steel, 
laminated or plastic, etc. 
A pharmacy shall be provided with a cupboard with lock and key for the 
storage of poisons and shall be clearly marked with the word "POISON" in red 
letters on a white background. 
Containers of all concentr ated solution shall bear special label or marked 
with the word "TO BE DILUTED". 
A Pharmacy shall be provided with the following minimum apparatus and 
books necessary for making of official preparations and prescriptions:— 
Apparatus— 
Balance, dispensing, sensitivity 30 mg., 
Balance, counter, capacity 3 Kgm., sensitivity 1 gm. 
Beakers, lipped, assorted sizes. 
Bottles, prescription, ungraduated assorted sizes. 
Corks assorted sizes and tapers. 
Cork, extracter. 
Evaporating dishes, porcelain. 
Filter paper 
Funnels, glass 
Litmus paper, blue and red. 
Measure glasses cylindrical 10 m., 25 ml., 100 ml. and 500 m. 
Mortars and pesties, glass. 
Mortars and pesties, wedgwood. 
Ointment pots with bakelite or suitable caps. 
Ointment slab, porcelain. 
Pipettes, graduated, 2 ml., 5 ml. and 10 ml. 
Ring, stand (retort) iron, complete with rings. 
Rubber stamps and pad. 
Scissors. 
Spatulas, rubber or vulcanite. 
Spatulas, stainless steel. 
Spirit lamp. 
Glass stirring rods. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Thermometer, 0° to 200°C. 
Tripod stand. 
Watch glasses. 
Water bath. 
Water distillation still in case Eye drops and Eye lotions are prepared 
Weights, Metric, 1 mg. to 100 gm. 
Wire Gauze. 
*Pill finisher, boxwood. 
*Pill Machine 
*Pill Boxes. 
*Suppository mould. 
Books: 
The Indian Pharmacopoeia [Current Edition] 
National Formulary of India [Current Edition] 
The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
The Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. 
The Pharmacy Act, 1948. 
The Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930. 
4. General provisions —A pharmacy shall be conducted under the 
continuous personal supervision o f a Registered Pharmacist whose name shall 
be displayed conspicuously in the premises. 
The Pharmacist shall always put on clean white overalls. 
The premises and fittings of the pharmacy shall be properly kept and 
everything shall be in good order and clean. 
All records and registers shall be maintained in accordance with the laws in 
force. Any container taken from the poison cupboard shall be replaced therein 
immediately after use and the cupboard locked. The keys of the poison 
cupboard shall be kept in the personal custody of the responsible person. 
Medicaments when supplied shall have labels conforming to the provisions 
of laws in force. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Note.— The above requirements are subject to modifications at the discretion of 
the Licensing Authority if he is of opin ion that having regard to the nature of 
drugs dispensed, compounded or prepared by the licensee. It is necessary to 
relax the above requirements or to impose additional requirements in the 
circumstances of a particular case. The decision of the Licensing A uthority in 
that regard shall be final. 
* These items are to be provided only by those who intend to dispense pills or 
suppositories, as the case may be.] 
1250[SCHEDULE O 
[See rule 126] 
STANDARD FOR DISINFECTANT FLUIDS 
1251[PART I 
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO BLACK FLUIDS AND WHITE 
FLUIDS 
The standards for disinfectants shall conform to the Indian Standards 
specification (IS 1061: 1997) laid down from time to time by the Bureau of 
Indian Standards.] 
1252 [SCHEDULE P 
 (See rule 96) 
LIFE PERIOD OF DRUGS 
SI. No. Name of the drug 
Period in months (unless 
otherwise specified) between 
date of manufacture and date 
of expiry which the labelled 
potency period of the drug 
shall not exceed under the 
conditions of storage 
specified in Column No. 4 
Conditions of storage 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
ANTIBIOTICS 
1. Adramycin 30 In a cool place 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
SI. No. Name of the drug 
Period in months (unless 
otherwise specified) between 
date of manufacture and date 
of expiry which the labelled 
potency period of the drug 
shall not exceed under the 
conditions of storage 
specified in Column No. 4 
Conditions of storage 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
2. Ampicillin 36 In a cool place 
3 Ampicillin Capsules 24 
4. Ampicillin Dry Syrup 24 
5. Ampicillin Injection 24 
6. Ampicillin Sodium 36 In a cool place. 
7. Ampicillin Trihydrate 30 In a cool place. 
8. Amoxycillin Trihydrate 36 In a cool place. 
9. Amoxycillin Trihydrate capsules 24 
10. Amoxycillin Trihydrate Dry 
Syrup 18 
11. Bacitracin 18 In a cool place. 
12. Bacitracin or Zinc Bacitracin 
Tablets 12 
13. Bacitracin Lozenges 12 
14. Carbenicillin Sodium Injection 24 At temperature not exceeding 
5°C. 
15. Carbanicillin Sodium Powder 24 At temperature not exceeding 
5°C. 
16. Cephalexin 24 In a cool place. 
17. Chloramphenicol 60 In a cool place. 
18. Chloramphenicol Capsules 
& Tablets 48 
19. Chloramphenicol Palmitate 48 
20. Chloramphenicol Palmitate Oral 
suspension 36 
21. Chloramphenicol Eye Drops 24 
22. Chloramphenicol Sodium 
Succinate Powder 48 In a cool place. 
23. Chloramphenicol Sodium 
Succinate Injection 36 In a cool place. 
24. Chlortetracycline Hydrochloride 60 In a cool place. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
SI. No. Name of the drug 
Period in months (unless 
otherwise specified) between 
date of manufacture and date 
of expiry which the labelled 
potency period of the drug 
shall not exceed under the 
conditions of storage 
specified in Column No. 4 
Conditions of storage 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
25. Chlortetracycline Hydrochloride 
Capsules 60 
26. Chlortetracycline Hydrochloride 
Tablets 24 
27. Chlortetracycline Hydrochloride 
Ointment 24 
28. Cloxacillin (Oral) 36 In a cool place. 
29. Cloxacillin Sodium (Injection 
Grade) 36 In a cool place. 
30. Colistin Sulphate 60 Protected from light. 
31. D-Cycloserine 48 
In a cool place. 

32. Dimethyl Chlortetracycline 
Hydrochloride 48 
33. Dimethyl Chlortetracycline 
Hydrochloride Capsules 36 
34. Daunoblastin Injection 36 
35. Doxycycline Hydrochloride 48 In a cool place. 
36. Doxycycline Monohydrate 36 In a cool place. 
37. Doxycycline Monohydrate for 
Oral Suspension 24 
38. Doxycycline Monohydrate 
Capsules 36 
39. Erythromycin Estolate 36 In a cool place. 
40. Erythromycin Ethylsuccinate 60 In a cool place. 
41. Erythromycin Oral Suspension 36 
42. Erythromycin Estolate for Oral 
Suspension 36 
43. Erythromycin Ethyl Succinate 
Tablet 24 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
44. Erythromycin Estolate Tablets 24 
45. Erythromycin Stearate 36 In a cool place. 
46. Framycetin Sulphate 48 
In a well closed container 
with temperature not 
exceeding 30°C. 
47. Framycetin Sulphate Eye Drops 24 
In a wel l closed container 
with temperature not 
exceeding 30°C. 
48. Framycetin Sulphate Ointment 24 
In a well closed container 
with temperature not 
exceeding 30°C. 
49. Gentamycin Sulphate 60 In a cool place. 
50. Gentamycin Sulphate Injection 36 
51. Gramicidin 60 In a cool place. 
52. Griseofulvin 48 In a cool place. 
53. Griseofulvin Tablets 36 
54. Kanamycin Sulphate Injection 24 
55. Kanamycin Acid Sulphate 
Powder 48 In a cool place. 
56. Mitomycin C 48 In a cool place. 
57. Neomycin Sulphate 48 In a cool place. 
58. Nystatin 36 At a temperature not 
exceeding 5°C. 
59. Oleandomycin Phosphate Sterile 24 In a cool place. 
60. Oleandomycin Phosphate Non-
Sterile 36 In a cool place. 
61. Oxytetracycline Hydrochloride 48 In a cool place. 
62. Oxytetracycline Hydrochloride 
Capsules 36 
63. Oxytetracycline Hydrochloride 
Tablets 24 
64. Oxytetracycline Hydrochloride 
Injection 24 
65. Oxytetracycline Hydrochloride 
Ointment 36 
66. Penicillin Crystalline 36 In a cool place. 
67. Penicillin Tablets 18 In a cool place. 
68. Procaine Penicillin G 36 In a cool place. 
69. Benzathin Penicillin G 48 In a cool place. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
70. Potassium Phenoxy Methyl 
Penicillin 48 In a cool place. 
71. Potassium Phenoxy Methyl 
Penicillin Tablets 24 
72. Polymixin B Sulphate 48 In a cool place 
73. Polymixin B Sulphate Ointment 
or Powder 24 In a cool place. 
74. Rifampicin 36 In a cool place. 
1253[75. Rifampicin Capsules 36] 
76. Spiramycin Base 24 In a cool place. 
77. Streptomycin Injection 36 In a cool place. 
78. Streptomycin Ointment 24 
79. Streptomycin Tablets 24 
80. Streptomycin Sulphate 48 At temperature not 
exceeding 20°C. 
81. Tetracycline Base 24 In a cool place. 
82. Tetracycline Hydrochloride 36 In a cool place 
83. Tetracycline Hydrochloride 
Capsules 36 
84. Tetracycline Tablets 24 
85. Tyrothricin 60 In a cool place. 
VITAMINS 
1. Vitamin A Injection 24 
2. Vitamin B1 Injection 24 
3. Thiamine Mononitrate Tablets 36 
4. Thiamine Hydrochloride 48 
In a well closed container, 
protected from light, in a 
cool place. 
5. Thiamine Mononitrate 48 
In a well closed container, 
protected from light, in a 
cool place. 
6. Riboflavin 60 
In a well closed container, 
protected from light, in a 
cool place. 
7. Riboflavin-5-Phosphate 24 
In a well closed container, 
protected from light, in a 
cool place. 
8. Riboflavin Tablets 36 
9. Vitamin B2 Injection 24 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
10. Vitamin B6 60 
In a well closed container, 
protected from light, in a 
cool place. 
11. Vitamin B6 Tablets 36 
12. Cyanacobalamin 48 
In a well closed conta iner, 
protected from light, in a 
cool place. 
13. Hydroxycobalamin 48 
In a well closed container, 
protected from light, in a 
cool place. 
14. Vitamin B12 Injection 36 
15. Calcium Pantothenate 36 
In a well closed container, 
protected from light, in a 
cool place. 
16. Vitamin C Injection 24 
17. Calcium Pantothenate Tablets 36 
1254[18. Vitamin C 48 
In a well closed container, 
protected from light, in a 
cool place.] 
19. Vitamin D2 D3 36 
In a well closed container, 
protected f rom light, in a 
cool place. 
20. Vitamin E or E-Acetate 60 
In a well closed container, 
protected from light, in a 
cool place. 
21. Folic Acid 60 
In a well closed container, 
protected from light, in a 
cool place. 
22. Folic Acid Tablets 36 
23. Vitamin K 60 
In a well closed container, 
protected from light, in a 
cool place 
24. Vitamin K Injection 36 
25. Niacinamide 60 
In a well closed container, 
protected from light, in a 
cool place. 
26. Niacinamide Tablets 36 
27. D-Panthenol 60 
In a well closed contai ner, 
protected from light, in a 
cool place. 
INSULIN PREPARATIONS 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1. Golbuline Zinc Insulin Injection 24 
At temperature between 2°C 
and 8°C, must not be allowed 
to freeze. 
2. Insulin Injection 24 
At temperature between 2°C 
and 8°C, must not be allowed 
to freeze. 
3. Insulin Zinc Suspension 24 
At temperature between 2°C 
and 8°C, must not be allowed 
to freeze. 
4. Insphane Insulin Injection 24 
At temperature between 2°C 
and 8°C, must not be allowed 
to freeze. 
1255[5. Human Insulin Injection 30 
At temperature between 2°C 
and 8°C, must not be allowed 
to freeze.] 
NORMAL HUMAN PLASMA 
1. Anti-Haemophillic Human 
Globulin 12 In a cool place. 
2. Dried Plasma 60 At temperature not exceeding 
25°C. 
3. Dried Normal Human Serum 
 Albumin 60 At temperature not exceeding 
25°C. 
4. Frozen Plasma 60 In deep freeze. 
5. Liquid Plasma 24 In cold place. 
6. Liquid Normal Human Serum 
Albumin 60 In cold place. 
1256[7. Whole Human Blood— 
 (a) Collected in ACD Solution 21 days At temperature between 4°C 
and 6°C. 
 (b) Collected in CPDA Solution 35 days At temperature between 4°C 
and 6°C.] 
SERA TOXIN AND TOXOID 
1. Alum Precipitated Diphtheria 
Toxoid 24 In cold place. 
2. 
Alum Precipitated Diphtheria 
and Tetanus Toxoid and 
Pertussis Vaccine combined 
18 In cold place. 
3. Alum Precipitated Tetanus 
Toxoid 24 In cold place. 
4. Aluminium Hydroxide 24 In cold place. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Absorbed Diphtheria Toxoid 
5. 
Aluminium Hydroxide 
Absorbed Diphtheria Tetanus 
Toxoid and Pertussis Vaccine 
combined 
18 In cold place. 
6. Aluminium Phosphate Absorbed 
Diphtheria Toxoid 24 In cold place. 
7. Aluminium Phosphate Absorbed 
Diphtheria and Tetanus Toxoid 24 In cold place. 
8. 
Aluminium Phosphate Absorbed 
Diphtheria Toxoid Tetanus 
Toxoid and Pertussis Vaccine 
combined 
18 In cold place. 
9. Diagnostic Diphtheria Toxin 
(Schick Test) 12 In cold place. 
10. Cobra Venom in Solution 3 Between 2°C and 5°C 
protected from light. 
11. Diphtheria Toxoid 24 In cold place. 
12. Inactivated Diagnostic 
Diphtheria Toxin 12 In cold place. 
13. Liquid Serum 12 Between 2°C and 10°C 
preferable at the lower limit. 
14. Lyophilised Anti-Snake Venom 
Serum 60 
15. Lyophilised Schick Test Toxin 
and control 60 
16. Old Tuberculin 60 In cold place. 
17. Thrombin (Bovine Original) 36 In cold place. 
1257[18. Tetanus Toxoid 36 In cold place.] 
19. Tuberculin PPD 60 In cold place. 
OTHER VACCINES 
1. Alum Precipitated Pertussis 
Vaccine 18 In cold place. 
1258[2. BCG Vaccine 24 In cold place.] 
3. Cholera Vaccine 18 In cold place. 
4. DHL Vaccine (For Dog) 12 In cold place. 
5. Measles Vaccine 24 In cold place. 
6. Plague Vaccine 36 In cold place. 
7. Polio Vaccine 
24 When stored at minus 20°C. 
6 When stored at Zero°C. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3 When stored at 4°C. 
8. Rabies Vaccine 6 In cold place. 
9. Typhoid Vaccine 18 In cold place. 
10. Typhoid and Para Typhoid 
Vaccine 18 In cold place. 
11. Typhoid Para Typhoid A and B 
Vaccine 18 In cold place. 
12. Typhoid Para Typhoid A, B and 
C Vaccine 18 In cold place. 
13. Typhoid Para Typhoid A, B and 
C and Tetanus Vaccine 18 In cold place. 
14. Typhus Vaccine 12 In cold place. 
15. Yellow Fever Vaccine 12 In cold place. 
1259[16. Anti-Rabies Vaccine (Cell 
Culture) 24 In cold place.] 

ANTI TOXIN 
(For Serum Extracted preparations) 20% 
Excess potency 12 In cold place. 
30% Excess potency 24 In cold place. 
40% Excess potency 36 In cold place. 
50% Excess potency 48 In cold place. 
(for enzyme preparations) 5% Excess 
potency 12 In cold place. 
10% Excess potency 24 In cold place. 
15% Excess potency 36 In cold place. 
20% Excess potency 48 In cold place. 

MISCELLANEOUS DRUGS 
1260[1. Adrenaline for Injection 12 [As prescribed in Indian 
Pharmacopoeia] 
2. Chorionic Gonadotrophin for 
Injection (Lyopholised) 36 At temperature not exceeding 
20°C 
3. Corticotrophin 24 In cold place. 
4. Corticotrophin Lyophilised 36 In cold place. 
5. Heparin Injection 36 In a cold place. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6. Liquid Extract of Ergot 12 In cold place. 
7. Liver Extract Crude Injection 24 In a cold place. 
8. Oxytocin Injection 24 In cold place. 
9. Paraldehyde Injection 6 In cool place protected from 
light. 
10. Pituitary Injection 24 In cold place. 
11. Vasopressin Injection 24 In cold place. 
Note: (1) The term “cool place" means place having a temperature between 
10°C and 25°C. 
(2) The term "cool place'' means a place having a temperature not exceeding 
8°C. 
(3) Capsules should be kept in a well -closed container at temperature not 
exceeding 30°C. 
(4) Wherever condition of storage is not specified in Column 4, it may be stored 
under normal room temperature.] 

1261[SCHEDULE P I 
(See rule 109) 
PACK SIZES OF DRUGS 
Name of the Drug Dosage form Pack Size 
(1) (2) (3) 
Albendazole Suspension 10 ml. 
Atenolol Tablets 14 
Anti-Haemmorhoidal Topicals Rectal Capsules 20 
Aspirin (Low Dose) Tablets 14 
Cholecalciferol or Ergocalciferol Granules 1 gm. Sachet 
Ciclopiroxolamine Vaginal Cream 30 gms. 
Catalin Ophthalmic drops 15 ml. 
Famotidine Tablets 14 
1342[ommitted] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Name of the Drug Dosage form Pack Size 
Isoniazide Syrup 200 ml. 
Ipecacuanha Syrup 10 ml. 
Oral Rehydration Salt (ORS) Powder Pouches to be reconstituted 
to one litre in one pack or 
in 5 unit dose sachets in 
one pack. 
Piperazine Granules 5 gm. 
Syrup 30 ml. 
Pyrantel Pamoate syrup 8 ml. or 10 ml. 
Potassium Chloride Syrup 60 ml. and 200 ml. 
Progestogen Qestrogen 
(Combinations for Oral 
Contraception) 
Tablets 21 or 22 with or without 7 
placebo 
Roxatidine Acetate Hydrochloride Tablets 14 
Vitamine A Oral Drops Drops 7.5 ml.] 
1262[Co-trimoxazole Suspension 50 ml. 
Haloperidol Oral Solution 15 ml. 
Loxapine Oral Liquid Concentrate 15 ml.] 
1263[SCHEDULE Q 
1263[***] 
1264[SCHEDULE R 
(See rule 125) 

STANDARDS FOR CONDOMS MADE OF RUBBER LATEX 
INTENDED FOR SINGLE USE AND OTHER MECHANICAL 
CONTRACEPTIVE 
I. Condoms 
1. Description—Condoms consist of cylindrical rubber sheaths with one 
end open. The open end shall terminate with an integral rim. The closed end 
may have a receptacle. They may be supplied rolled and shall be free from 
tackiness and shall be capable of being unrolled readily. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. Materials—(1) Condoms shall be manufactured from good quality 
rubber latex and shall be free from embedded grit and shall be opaque or 
translucent prior to the application of dusting materials or lubricants; 
(2) The rubber latex, col ours used and any dusting materials or lubricants 
applied to the condoms shall neither contain nor liberate substances which are 
known to have toxic or other harmful effects under normal conditions of vise. 
Any dusting material or lubricant or colour used shall not have deleterious 
effect on the condoms or be harmful to the users. 
3. Procedure for sampling during production —(1) Specimens 
constituting the test samples shall be taken at random successively from each 
quantum of production that is, from the quantity produced from the same 
finished rubber latex and under the same processing and finishing conditions of 
manufacture and samples from each quantum shall be tested separately to 
ascertain conformity of quantum with the specified requirements in accor dance 
with the tests described in this Schedule. 
(2) (a) The number of samples drawn from each quantum shall not be less 
than 0.5 per cent of the number. 
(b) The number of samples drawn from each quantum shall be tested for 
Burst Volume and Pressure Test and Water Leakage Test in accordance with the 
method prescribed in paras 9 and 10 of this Schedule; 75 per cent of the samples 
drawn will be tested for Water Leakage Test and 25 per cent will be tested for 
Burst Volume and Pressure Test; 
(c) The number of t est samples 'N' and the number of rejected samples 'R' 
from a sequence of production quanta shall be recorded in a register. The 
cumulative total of test samples 'N' and the cumulative total of rejects 'R' from 
the test shall be recorded and the condoms sh all be deemed to comply with the 
requirements if the cumulative total of rejects 'R' is not more than 1265[0.0025N 
+ 3 x √0.0025N] for Water Leakage Test, and 1265[0.01N + 3 x √0.015N] for 
Burst Volume and Pressure Test. 
(3) Each unit of 100 test samples shall be distributed for the various tests 
as follows:— 
25 for Burst Volume Pressure Test, and; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
75 for Water Leakage Test. 
(4) Where the number of test samples is a multiple of 100 the distributi on 
scale mentioned above shall be prorated. 
(5) If the cumulative total of samples rejected exceeds the number of 
allowables at any point in the sequence of quanta, the quantum at which this 
occurs shall be liable to rejection. The assessment of quality of further 
production quanta shall include all previous test results starting from Quantum 
Number 1 and approval of production shall be in suspense until the condition 
required by the scheme is again fulfilled. 
(6) At least one sample shall be taken at random from each production 
quantum not exceeding 10,000 condoms and shall satisfy all requirements 
regarding dimensions as specified in paragraph 8 of this Schedule. 
4. Procedure for sampling and testing of finished products by a 
manufacturer.—(A) Water Leakage Test—(1) Statistical sampling for quality 
control assessment of the finished product in respect of water leakage test shall 
be done in accordance with the plant set out in Annexure I to this Schedule. 
(2) A test sample failing in the above test is to be considered as defective. If 
the cumulative total of rejects 'R' is found to be equal to or greater than the 
number shown against 'R' in Annexure -I, the batch or lot shall be declared as 
not of standard quality. 
(B) Bursting Volume and Pressure Test —(1) Sample condoms shall be 
tested for Bursting Volume and Pressure Test. Statistical sampling for this test 
shall be done in accordance with the plan set out in Annexure III to this 
Schedule. 
Condom shall not leak or burst at a volume of less than that spe cified or at a 
pressure less than 1.0 kpa (guage), when tested as per paragraph 9, both before 
and after oven conditioning as specified in Annexure V. Bursting Volume 
minimum limit in litres shall be equal to: 
[mean condom width (mm)2] rounded to the nearest 0.5 litre. 
151.8 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(2) A test sample failing in the above test is to considered defective. If the 
cumulative total of rejects 'R' is found to be equal to or greater than the number 
shown against 'R' in Annexure III, the batch or lot shall be declared as not of 
standard quality. 
(C) Dimensions—At least two samples from the lot or batch shall satisfy the 
requirements regarding dimensions as specified in paragraph 8 of this Schedule. 
5. Procedure for sampling and testing of condoms by a purchaser.— 
(A) Wafer Leakage Test.—(1) Statistical sampling of condoms by a purchaser 
for Water Leakage Test shall be done in accordance with the pant set out in 
Annexure II to this Schedule. 
(2) A test sample failing in the above test is to be considered as defective. If 
the cumulative total of rejects 'R' is found to be equal to or greater than the 
number shown against 'R' in Annexure -II, the batch or lot shall be declared as 
not of standard quality. 
(B) Bursting Volume and Pressure Test. —(1) Sample condoms shall be 
tested for Bursting Volume and Pressure Test. Statistical sampling for this test 
shall be done in accordance with the plan set out in Annexure III to this 
Schedule. If the cumulative total of rejects 'R' is found to be equal to or greater 
than the number sho wn against 'R' in Annexure -III, the batch or lot shall be 
declared as not of standard quality. 
Condom shall not leak or burst at a volume of less than that specified or at a 
pressure less than 1.0 kpa (guage), when tested as specified in paragraph 9, both 
before and after oven conditioning as specified in Annexure V. Bursting 
Volume minimum limit in litres shall be equal to 
[mean condom width (mm)2] - rounded to the nearest 0.5 litre. 
 151.8 
(C) Dimensions.—At least two samples from t he lot or batch shall satisfy 
the requirements regarding dimensions as specified in paragraph 8 of this 
Schedule. 
6. Sampling plan for a Drugs Inspector —(1) Where an Inspector under 
the Act desires to take for test samples from the premises of manufactu rer or a 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
distribution depot; twenty containers from each batch of production may be 
selected by him on a random basis and from each of the containers, five samples 
shall be taken. The hundred samples so selected shall be distributed for various 
tests as sp ecified in paragraph 7 of this Schedule. In case, the number of 
containers is less than twenty, the number of samples to be taken from each 
container shall be proportionately increased. 
(2) Where an Inspector under the Act, desires to take samples from a s ale 
premises, he shall take hundred samples from each batch of production in 
accordance with the procedure as specified in sub-paragraph (1). 
7. Sampled condoms drawn under sub -paragraph (1) shall be distributed 
for the various tests as follows:— 
Two samples for thickness, length and width; 
Forty five samples for Water Leakage Test; 
Forty five samples for Bursting Volume and Pressure Test; and 
Eight samples as reserve. 
The samples shall be declared as not of standard quality, if : (i) the number 
of condo ms found defective in the Water Leakage Test exceeds one; (ii) the 
number of condoms found defective in Bursting Volume and Pressure Test 
exceeds two; (iii) samples fail to conform to the requirements of dimensions as 
specified in paragraph 8 of this Schedule. 
8. Dimensions—(1) The length when unrolled (excluding test) shall be not 
less than— 
(i) 170 mm 
(ii) 180 mm 
(2) The width of a condom when laid flat and measured at any point within 
85 mm from the open end shall be:— 
(i) 49 ± 2 mm for 170mm length 
(ii) 53 ± 2 mm for 180mm length 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(3) The single wall thickness of a condom when measured at three points, 
one at 30 + 2 mm from the open end, 30 + 5 mm from the close and excluding 
the reservoir tip and at the mid distance between these two point shall be from 
0.045 mm to 0.075 mm. 
Note 1. —The single -wall thickness shall be determined with a suitable 
micrometer dial guage graduated in intervals of 0.01 mm. 
Note 2.—Condoms shall, prior to the measurements of thickness, have the 
dusting powder or the lubricant or both removed by means of water or 
Isopropanol. 
9. Bursting Volume and Pressure Test —Determination of Bursting 
Volume and Pressure Test shall be done as specified in Annexure IV. 
10. Water Leakage Test —Unroll the condom and fit th e open end on a 
suitable mount, the condom thus being suspended open end upwards. Fill it with 
300 ml water at room temperature and inspect it after a period of least 1 minute 
for leakage upto 25 mm from the open end. If raise the closed end until water 
level reaches this distance. After atleast 1 minute inspect the newly -wetted part 
of the condom for leakage. The condom shall be deemed to be defective if it 
bursts during test or shows any evidence of leakage or seepage or micro -
droplets or does not hold 300 ml. water. 
11. Quantity of Lubricant —(1) The condoms shall be dressed with 
silicone lubricant. The quantity required on each individual condom should not 
be less than 200 gm. and the minimum viscosity shall be 200 centistokes. 
(2) Lubricated condoms in individual foil packages shall be weighed on an 
Analytical Balance. Each condom shall be removed from its foil package and 
both condom and its foil package shall be washed in denatured ethanol or 
isopropanol, dried and then weighed again. All weights shall be recorded to the 
nearest milligram (mg). Compliance with the requirement shall be determined 
by subtracting the weight of the washed and dried condom and its foil package 
from the weight of the sample condom in individual foil package prior to the 
removal of lubricant. Washing and drying may be repeated upto a total of four 
times if the lubricant quantity is less than the required minimum. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(3) At least thirteen samples shall be drawn from the lot or batch and the 
samples shall satisfy the requirements regarding the quantity of lubricant. 
12. Colour Fastness —Not less than ten samples taken at random from 
each batch of coloured condoms shall pass the following test for colour fastness, 
namely:— 
Thoroughly wet inside and outside of the condom with distilled water. Make 
no attempt to remove any dusting material or lubricant. Wrap the wet condom in 
white absorbent paper so that the largest possible surface area of the condom is 
in contact with the paper and seal the whole in a suitable container to p revent 
loss of moisture. Allow the container and its contents to stand for 16 hours to 24 
hours at room temperature. After remov : ig the absorbent paper from the 
container, examine it visually in natural day -light for a indication of staining. 
No part of t he absorbent paper shall be stained. If there is any in dication of 
staining of the absorbent paper by any col ouring agent present in any of t he 
condoms or any dusting material or lubricant, the entire batch shall be declared 
to be not of standard quality. 
13. Labelling, packing and storage —(1) The condoms shall be 
individually wrapped and sealed in laminates containing atleast eight microns of 
aluminium foil. The individual condom shall be packed in square (non -squeeze 
condition)/rectangular aluminium fo il. The packing shall protect the condoms 
from contamination and mechanical damage. The smallest packing offered to 
the consumer shall bear a clear permanent marking with the following 
particulars, namely:— 
(i) Manufacturer's name and address and the tr ade name of the condoms, 
if any; 
(ii) Batch number; 
(iii) Date of manufacture (Month and year only); 
(iv) Date of expiry (Month and year only) which shall not be more than 
thirty six months from the date of manufacture; 
(v) The words "For single use only" 
(2) The condoms shall be stored in a cool dry place away from heat and direct 
sunlight. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
14. Integrity of individual package seals —Sample condoms in individual 
packages shall be placed in a sealed, transparent container (such as laboratory 
Bell jar) and subjected to vacuum of 50 ± 10 kpa (gauge) for a period of one 
minute. 
Condom packages that do not inflate or remain inflated for the period of the 
test shall be deemed non-compliers. In doubtful cases, the test may be repeated, 
and both the inflation and deflation of packages may be observed on application 
and removal of vacuum. An AQL of 2.5 per cent will be applied in assessing the 
results of this test. Thirty -two samples of condoms for a batch size less than 5 
lakhs and fifty samples of condoms for batch size more them 5 lakhs shall be 
tested for integrity test of individual package seals and the compliance limit or 
acceptance number shall be not more than two or three condoms respectively. 
II. Other Mechanical Contraceptive 
15. Standards for o ther mechanical contraceptive —Standards for 
'Copper T' and 'Tube Ring' shall be as laid down in Annexure VI. 

1266[ANNEXURE I 
[See paragraph 4(A)] 
SAMPLING PLAN FOR QUALITY CONTROL OF CONDOMS AT 
MANUFACTURERS LEVEL 
BATCH SIZE : 35001 to 1.5 LAKHS 
Single Sampling Plan 
Sample Size 200 : 
AQL —0.25 
AC —1 
R —2 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
BATCH SIZE :150001 to 5 LAKHS 
Single Sampling Plan 
Sample Size 315 : 
AQL —0.25 
AC —2 
R —3 

BATCH SIZE: OVER 5 LAKHS 
Single Sampling Plan 
Sample Size 500 : 
AQL —0.25 
AC —3 
R —4 

Note.—AQL denotes Acceptance Quality Level; 
AC denotes Acceptance Number i.e., the maximum allowable number of 
defectives for acceptance of the Batch; and 
R denotes Rejection Number i.e., minimum number of defectives for 
rejection of the Batch 

ANNEXURE II 
[See paragraph 5(A)] 
SAMPLING PLAN FOR QUALITY CONTROL OF CONDOMS AT 
PURCHASER'S LEVEL 

BATCH SIZE : 35001 to 1.5 LAKHS 
Single Sampling Plan 
Sample Size 200 : 
AQL —0.25 
AC —1 
R —2 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 

BATCH SIZE :150001 to 5 LAKHS 
Single Sampling Plan 
Sample Size 315 : 
AQL —0.25 
AC —2 
R —3 

BATCH SIZE: OVER 5 LAKHS 
Single Sampling Plan 
Sample Size 500 : 
AQL —0.25 
AC —3 
R —4 

Note.—AQL denotes Acceptance Quality Level : 
AC denotes Acceptance Number i.e., the maximum allow able number of 
defectives for acceptance of the Batch; and 
R denotes Rejection Number i.e., minimum number of defectives for 
rejection of the Batch. 
ANNEXURE III 
 [See paragraphs 4(B) and 5(B)] 
SAMPLING PLAN FOR BURSTING VOLUME AND PRESSURE 
TEST 
BATCH SIZE : 35001 to 1.5 LAKHS 
Single Sampling Plan 
Sample Size 200 : 
AQL- 1.5 
AC —7 
R —8 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
BATCH SIZE :150001 to 5 LAKHS 
Single Sampling Plan 
Sample Size 315 : 
AQL —1.5 
AC —10 
R —11 

BATCH SIZE: OVER 5 LAKHS 
Single Sampling Plan 
Sample Size 500 : 
AQL —1.5 
AC —14 
R —15 
Note.—AQL denotes Acceptance Quality Level : 
AC denotes Acceptance Number i.e., the maximum allowable number 
of defectives for acceptance of the Batch; and 
R denotes Rejection Number i.e., minimum number of defectives for 
rejection of the Batch.] 
ANNEXURE IV 
(See paragraphs 9) 
DETERMINATION OF BURSTING VOLUME AND PRESSURE 
1. Principle—Inflation of a constant length of the condom with air and 
recording the volume and pressure at the moment of bursting. 
2. Apparatus— (1) Apparatus suitable for inflating the condom with clean 
air at a specified rate and provided with equipment for measuring volume and 
pressure. 
(2) Suitable mount for fitting the condoms to the apparatus as shown in the 
figure annexed. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(3) Rod, 140 mm in length having a smooth sphere 20 mm in diameter at 
its top (see the figure) for hanging the unrolled condom when fixed to the 
apparatus. 
3. Procedure— (1) Unroll the condom, hang it on the rod (2.3), affix to 
the mount (2.2) and inflate with air at a ra te of 0.4 to 0.5 litre/Sec (24 to 30 
litres/min.). 
(2) Measure and note the Bursting Volume, in litres rounded to the nearest 
0.5 litre and the bursting pressure, in kilopascals rounded to the nearest 0.1 kpa. 
4. Test report—The test report shall include the following particulars : 
(a) the identification of the sample; 
(b) the Bursting Volume and Bursting Pressure of each tested 
condom; 
(c) the date of testing. 
ANNEXURE V 
[(See paragraphs 4(B) and 5(B)] 
OVEN CONDITIONING 
1. Principle of the Method—The test consists in subjecting test samples 
to controlled deterioration by air at an elevated temperature and at atmospheric 
pressure after which Burst Volume and Pressure limits are measured. 
2. Apparatus—The air oven shall be of such a size th at the total volume 
of the test samples does not exceed 10 per cent of the free air space of the oven. 
Provision shall be made for slow circulation of air in the oven of not less than 
three changes and not more than ten changes per hour. The temperature of the 
oven shall be thermostatically controlled so that the test samples are kept within 
+ 2°C of the specified ageing temperature. A thermometer shall be placed near 
the centre of the ageing test samples to record the actual ageing temperature. 
Note.—Copper or Copper alloys shall not be used for the material of 
construction of the oven prescribed. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. Test Sample —The foil laminations of individual packages should 
remain intact throughout all laboratory handling including over conditioning. 
4. Temperature of the oven—Maintain the oven at 70 + 2°C. 
5. Duration of test—96 Hours. 
6. Procedure—Condition the requisite number of unopened packages of 
rubber condoms in the oven at 70 ± 2°C for 96 Hrs. After heating, keep the 
packages 23 + 5°C for atleast 1 2 hours but not more than 96 Hours. Open the 
packages and examine conditioned condoms for tackiness, brittleness, or other 
signs of deterioration. Within 96 hours but not sooner than 12 hours after 
conditioning, do the Bursting Volume and Pressure Test as described in this 
Schedule. 
ANNEXURE VI 
(See paragraph 15) 
1. Standards for Copper T (200B) (IS -12418) (Part 4) -1991-UDC 
615.477.87— Contraceptive Device Copper T (200 B) shall conform to the 
Indian Standards laid down from time to time by the Bureau o f Indian 
Standards. 
2. Standards for Contraceptive Tubal Ring (IS 13009:1990 -UDC 
615.472.6:611.656)— Contraceptive Device Tubal Ring shall conform to the 
Indian Standards laid down from time to time by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards.] 
1267[SCHEDULE R1 
(See rules 109A, 109B, 109C and and 125A) 
The medical devices shall conform to the Indian Standards laid down from 
time to time by the Bureau of Indian Standards. If there are no Bureau of Indian 
Standards then it shall conform to the International Standards, like International 
Organisation for Standardisation, or other International Pharmacopeia Standards 
and such other standards as may be specified for this purpose. In case national 
or international standards are not available, the device shall conform to the 
manufacturer's validated standards.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
SCHEDULE S 
1268[***] 
1269[SCHEDULE T 
(See Rule 157) 
GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES FOR AYURVEDIC SIDDHA 
AND UNANI MEDICINES 
The Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) are prescribed as follows in Part 
I and Part II to ensure:— 
(i) raw materials used in the manufacture of drugs are authentic, of 
prescribed quality and are free from contamination; 
(ii) the manufacturing process is as has been prescribed to maintain the 
standards; 
(iii) adequate quality control measures are adopted; 
(iv) the manufactured drug which is released for sale is of acceptable 
quality; and 
(v) to achieve the objectives listed above, each licencee shall evolve 
methodology and procedures for following the prescribed process of 
manufacture of drugs which should be documented as a manual and 
kept for reference and inspection. However, under IMCC Act, 1970 
registered Vaidyas, Siddhas and Hakeems who prepare medicines on 
their own to dispense to their patients and not selling such drugs in 
the market are exempted from the purview of Good Manufacturing 
Practices (GMP). 
PART I 
GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES 
1.1 Factory Premises: 
The manufacturing plant should have adequate space for— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(i) receiving and storing raw material; 
(ii) manufacturing process areas; 
(iii) quality control section; 
(iv) finished goods store; 
(v) office; and 
(vi) rejected goods/drugs store. 
1.1 General Requirements: 
1.1(A) Location and surroundings.—The factory buildings for manufacture 
of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani medicines shall be so situated and shall have 
such construction as to avoid contamination from open sewerage, drain, public 
lavatory or any factory which produces d isagreeable or obnoxious odour or 
fumes or excessive soot, dust or smoke. 
1.1(B) Buildings.—The building used for factory shall be such as to permit 
production of drugs under hygienic conditions and should be free from cobwebs 
and insects/rodents. It shoul d have adequate provision of light and ventilation. 
The floor and the walls should not be damp or moist. The premises used for 
manufacturing, processing, packaging and labelling will be in conformity with 
the provisions of the Factory Act. It shall be located so as to be:— 
(I) Compatible with other manufacturing operations that may be carried 
out in the same or adjacent premises. 
(II) Adequately provided with working space to allow orderly and logical 
placement of equipment and materials to avoid the risk of mix up between 
different drugs or components thereof and control the possibility of cross 
contamination by other drugs or substances and avoid the risk of omission of 
any manufacturing or control step. 
(III) Designed, constructed and maintained to prevent entry of insects and 
rodents. Interior surface (walls, floors and ceilings) shall be smooth and free 
from cracks and permit easy cleaning and disinfection. The walls of the room in 
which the manufacturing operations are carried out shall be impe rvious to and 
be capable of being kept clean. The flooring shall be smooth and even and shall 
be such as not to permit retention or accumulation of dust or waste products. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(IV) Provided with proper drainage system in the processing area. The 
sanitary fitting and electrical fixtures in the manufacturing area shall be proper 
and safe. 
(V) Furnace/Bhatti section could be covered with tin roof and proper 
ventilation, but sufficient care should be taken to prevent flies and dust. 
(VI) There should be fire safety measures and proper exits should be 
there. 
(VII) Drying space.—There be separate space for drying of raw material, 
in process medicine or medicines require drying before packing. This space will 
be protected from flies/insects/dusts etc., by prop er flooring, wire -mach 
window, glass pans or other material. 
1.1(C) Water Supply.—The water used in manufacture shall be pure and of 
potable quality. Adequate provision of water for washing the premises shall be 
made. 
1.1(D) Disposal of waste .—From the man ufacturing sections and 
laboratories the waste water and the residues which might be prejudicial to the 
workers or public health shall be disposed off. 
1.1(E) Container's cleaning .—In factories where operations involving the 
use of containers such as bottl es, vials and jars are conducted, there shall be 
adequate arrangements separated from the manufacturing operations for 
washing, cleaning and drying of such containers. 
1.1(F) Stores.—Storage should have proper ventilation and shall be free 
from dampness. I t should provide independent adequate space for storage of 
different types of material, such as raw material, packaging material and 
finished products. 
1.1(F)(A) Raw materials. —All raw materials procured for manufacturing 
will be stored in the raw material s store. The manufacture based on the 
experience and the characteristics of the particular raw material used in 
Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani system shall decide the use of appropriate 
containers which would protect quality of the raw material as well as prev ent it 
from damage due to dampness, microbiological contamination or rodent and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
insect infestation, etc. If certain raw materials require such controlled 
environmental conditions, the raw materials stores may be sub -divided with 
proper enclosures to provid e such conditions by suitable cabinization. While 
designing such containers, cabins or areas in the raw materials stores, care may 
be taken to handle the following different categories of raw materials:— 
(1) Raw material of metallic origin; 
(2) Raw material of mineral origin; 
(3) Raw material from animal source; 
(4) Fresh Herbs; 
(5) Dry Herbs or plant parts; 
(6) Excipients; etc.; 
(7) Volatile oils/perfumes & flavours; and 
(8) Plant concentrates extracts and exudates/resins. 
Each cont ainer used for raw material storage shall be properly identified 
with the label which indicates name of the raw material, source of supply and 
will also clearly state the status of raw material such as "UNDER TEST" or 
"APPROVED" or "REJECTED" The labels shall further indicate the identity of 
the particular supply in (be form of Batch No. or Lot No. and the date of receipt 
of the consignment. 
All the raw materials shall be sampled and got tested either by the in -house 
Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani experts (Qua lity control technical person) or by 
the laboratories approved by the Government and shall be used only on 
approval after verifying. The rejected raw material should be removed from 
other raw material store and should be kept in separate room. Procedure of 'First 
in first out' should be adopted for raw materials wherever necessary. Records of 
the receipt, testing and approval or rejection and use of raw material shall be 
maintained. 
1.1(F)(B) Packaging Materials. —All packaging materials such as bottles, 
jars, capsules etc. shall be stored properly. All containers and closure shall be 
adequately cleaned and dried before packing the products. 
1.1(F)(C) Finished Goods Stores. —The finished goods transferred from the 
production area after proper packaging shall b e stored in the finished goods 
stores within an area marked "Quarantine". After the quality control laboratory 
and the experts have checked the correctness of finished goods with reference to 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
its packing/labelling as well as the finished product quality as prescribed, then it 
will be moved to "Approved Finished Goods Stock" area. Only approved 
finished goods shall be dispatched as per marketing requirements. Distribution 
records shall be maintained as required. 
If any Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug needs special storage conditions, 
finished goods store shall provide necessary environmental requirements. 
1.1(G) Working space. —The manufacturing area shall provide adequate 
space (manufacture and quality control) for orderly placement of equipment and 
material used in any of the operations for which these are employed so as to 
facilitate easy and safe working and to minimize or to eliminate any risk of mix-
up between different dines, raw materials and to .prevent the possibility of cross 
contamination of one dr ug by another drug that is manufactured, stored or 
handled in the same premises. 
1.1(H) Health Clothing, Sanitation and Hygiene of Workers. —All workers 
employed in the Factory shall be free from contagious diseases. The clothing of 
the workers shall consis t of proper, uniform suitable to the nature of work and 
the climate and shall be clean. The uniform shall also include cloth or synthetic 
covering for hands, feet and head wherever required. Adequate facilities for 
personal cleanliness such as clean towels , soap and scrubbing brushes shall be 
provided. Separate provision shall be made for lavatories to be used by men and 
women, and such lavatories shall be located at places separated from the 
processing rooms. Workers will also be provided facilities for ch anging their 
clothes and to keep their personal belongings. 
1.1(I) Medical Services.—The manufacturer shall also provide— 
(a) adequate facilities for first aid; 
(b) medical examination of workers at the time of employment and 
periodical check up ther eafter by a physician once a year, with 
particular attention being devoted to freedom from infections. 
Records thereof shall be maintained. 
1.1(J) Machinery and Equipments. —For carrying out manufacturing 
depending on the size of operation and the nature of product manufactured, 
suitable equipment either manually operated or operated semi -automatically 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(Electrical or steam based) or fully automatic machinery shall be made 
available. These may include machines for use in the process of manufacture 
such as cru shing, grinding, powdering, boiling, mashing, burning, roasting, 
filtering, drying, filling, labelling and packing etc. To ensure ease in movement 
of workers and orderliness in operations a suitably adequate space will be 
ensured between two machines or ro ws of machines. These machinery and 
equipments have to be properly installed and maintained with proper cleaning. 
List of equipments and machinery recommended is indicated in Part IIA. 
Proper standard operational procedures (SOPs) for cleaning, maintaining and 
performance of every machine should be laid down. 
1.1(K) Batch Manufacturing Records. —The licencee shall maintain batch 
manufacturing record of each batch of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs 
manufactured irrespective of the type of product manufactur ed (classical 
preparation or patent and proprietary medicines). Manufacturing records are 
required to provide an account of the list of raw materials and their quantities 
obtained from the store, tests conducted during the various stages of 
manufacture lik e taste, colour, physical characteristics and chemical tests as 
may be necessary or indicated in the approved books of Ayurveda, Siddha and 
Unani mentioned in the First Schedule of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 
(23 of 1940). These tests may include any in-house or pharmacopoeial test 
adopted by the manufacturer in the raw material or in the process material and 
in the finished product. These records shall be duly signed by Production and 
Quality Control Personnel respectively. Details of transfer of manufactured drug 
to the finished products store including dates and quantity of drugs transferred 
along with record of testing of the finished product, if any, and packaging, 
records shall be maintained. Only after the manufactured drugs have been 
verified and accepted quality shall be allowed to be cleared for sale. 
It should be essential to maintain the record of date, manpower, machine and 
equipments used and to keep in process record of various shodhana, Bhavana, 
burning in fire and specific grindings in terms of internal use. 
1.1 (L) Distribution Records. —Records of sale and distribution of each 
batch of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drugs shall be maintained in order to 
facilitate prompt and complete recall of the batch, if necessary. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
The duration of record keeping should be the date of expiry of the batch. 
Certain category of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani medicines like Bhasma, Rasa, 
Kupi-pakva, Parpati, Sindura, Karpu/uppu/puran, Kushta, Asava -arista, etc., do 
not have expiry date, in contrast their efficacy increases with the passage of 
time. Hence, records need to be maintained upto five years of the exhausting of 
stock. 
1.1 (M) Record of Market Complaints .—Manufacturers shall maintain a 
register to record all reports of market complaints received regarding the 
products sold in the market. The manufacturer shall enter all data received on 
such market complaints, investigations carried out by the manufacturers 
regarding the complaint as well as any corrective action initiated to prevent 
recurrence of such market complaints shall also be recorded. Once in a period of 
six months the manufacturer shall submit the record of such complaints to the 
licensing authority. The Register shall also be available for inspection during 
any inspection of the premises. 
Report of any adverse reaction resulting from the use of Ayurvedic, Siddha 
and Unani drugs shall also be maintained in a separate register by each 
manufacturer. The manufacturer shall investigate any of the adverse reaction to 
find if the same is due to any defec t in the product, and whether such reactions 
are already reported in the literature or it is a new observation. 
1.1(N) Quality Control .—Every licensee is required lo provide facility for 
quality control section in his own premises or through Government app roved 
testing laboratory. The test shall be as per the Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani 
pharmacopoeial standard. Where the tests are not available, the test should be 
performed according to the manufacturers's specification or other information 
available. The quality control section shall verify all the raw materials, monitor 
in process, quality checks and control the quality of finished product being 
released to finished goods store/warehouse. Preferably for such quality control 
there will be a separate expert. The quality control section shall have the 
following facilities:— 
(1) There should be 150 sq. feet area for quality control section. 
(2) For identification of raw drugs, reference books and reference sampies 
should be maintained. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(3) Manufacturing record should be maintained for the various processes. 
(4) To verify the finished products, controlled samples of furnished products 
of each batch will be kept for 3 years. 
(5) To supervise and monitor adequacy of conditions under which raw 
materials, semi-finished products and finished products are stored. 
(6) Keep record in establishing shelf life and storage requirements for the 
drugs. 
(7) Manufacturers who are manufacturing patent proprietory Ayurveda, 
Siddha and Unani medicines shall provide their own specification and control 
references in respect of such formulated drugs. 
(8) The record of specific method and procedure preparation that is, 
"Bhavana" "Mardana" and "Puta" and the record of every process carried out 
by the manufacturer shall be maintained. 
(9) The standards for identity, purity and strength as given in respective 
pharmacopoeias of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani systems of medicines 
published by Government of India shall be complied with. 
(10) All raw materials will be moni tored for fungal, bacterial contamination 
with a view to minimise such contamination. 
(11) Quality control section will have a minimum of— 
1270[(i) (a) Expert in Ayurveda or Siddha or Unani medicine who possess 
a degree quali fication recognized under Schedule II of Indian 
Medicine Central Council Act, 1970; 
(b)Chemist, who shall possess at least a Bachelor Degree in Science 
or Pharmacy or Pharmacy (Ayurveda) awarded by a recognized 
University; and 
(c) Botanist (Pharmacognosist), who shall possess at least a Bachelor 
Degree in Science (Medical) or Pharmacy or Pharmacy 
(Ayurveda) awarded by a recognized University:] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(ii) The manufacturing unit shall have a quality control section as 
explained under section 35(ii). Alternativel y, these quality control 
provisions will be met by getting testing etc., from a recognised 
laboratory for Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs; under rule 160A of 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act. The manufacturing company will 
maintain all the records of various t ests got done from outside 
recognised laboratory. 
(iii) List of equipments recommended is indicated in Part II C. 
1.2 Requirement for Sterile Product: 
1.2(A) Manufacturing Areas .—For the manufacture of sterile Ayurvedic, 
Unani and Siddha drugs, separate enclosed areas specifically designed for the 
purpose shall be provided. These areas shall be provided with air locks for entry 
and shall be essentially dust free and ventilated with an air supply. For all areas 
where aseptic manufacture has to be carried out, air supply shall be filtered 
through bacteria retaining filters (HEPA Filters) and shall be at a pressure 
higher than in the adjacent areas. The filters shall be checked for performance 
on installation and periodically thereafter the record of checks shall be 
maintained. All the surfaces in sterile manufacturing areas shall be designed to 
facilitate cleaning and disinfection. For sterile manufacturing routine microbial 
counts of all Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug manufacturing areas shall be 
carried out during operations. Results of such count shall be checked against 
established in-house standards and record maintained. 
Access to manufacturing areas shall be restricted to minimum number of 
authorised personnel. Special procedure to be followed for en tering and leaving 
the manufacturing areas shall be written down and displayed. 
For the manufacturing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug that can be 
sterilised in their final containers, the design of the areas shall preclude the 
possibility of the products intended for sterilisation being mixed with or taken to 
be products already sterilised. In case of terminally sterilised products, the 
design of the areas shall preclude the possibility of mix up between non -sterile 
and sterile products. 
1.2(B) Precautions against contamination and mix.— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) Carrying out manufacturing operations in a separate block of 
adequately isolated building or operating in an isolated enclosure within 
the building. 
(b) Using appropriate pressure differential in the process area. 
(c) Providing a suitable exhaust system. 
(d) Designing laminar flow sterile air systems for sterile products. 
(e) The germicidal efficiency of UV lamps shall be checked and 
recorded indicating the burning hours or checked using intensity. 
(f) Individual containers of liquids, and ophthalmic solutions shall be 
examined against black-white background fitted with diffused light after 
filling to ensure freedom from contamination with foreign suspended 
matter. 
(g) Expert technical staff approv ed by the Licensing Authority shall 
check and compare actual yield against theoretical yield before final 
distribution of the batch. 
All process controls as required under master formula including 
room temperature, relative humidity, volume filled, leakage and clarity 
shall be checked and recorded. 
PART II 
A. LIST OF RECOMMENDED MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT AND 
MINIMUM MANUFACTURING PREMISES REQUIRED FOR THE 
MANUFACTURE OF VARIOUS CATEGORIES OF AYURVEDIC, 
SIDDHA SYSTEM OF MEDICINES 
One machine indicated for one cat egory of medicine could be used for the 
manufacturing of other category of medicine also. Similarly some of the 
manufacturing areas like powdering, furnace, packing of liquids and Avaleha, 
Paks, could also be shared for these items. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
S.No. Category of Medicine 
Minimum 
Manufacturing space 
required 
Machinery/equipment 
recommended 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 

1200 square feet covered area 
with separate cabins partitions 
for each activity. If Unani 
medicines are manufactured in 
same premises an additional 
area of 400 sq. feet will be 
required. 

1. 

Anjana/Pisti 100 sq.feet 
Karel/machanised/motorised 
kharel, End runner/Ball -Mill 
Sieves/Shifier 
2. Chuma/Nasya/Manjan/ 
Lepal/Kwath Churn 200 sq. feet 
Grinder/Disintegrator/ 
Pulverizer/Powder mixer/ 
sieves/shifter 
3. Pills/Vatti/Gutika Matrica 
and tablets 100 sq.feet 
Ball Mill, Mass Mixer/Powder 
mixer Granulator drier. Tablet 
compressing machine, pill/vati 
cutting machine, stainless steel 
trays/containers for storage and 
sugar-coating, polishing pan in 
case of sug ar coated tablets, 
mechanised chattoo (for mixing 
of guggulu) where required. 
4. 
Kupi pakava/Ksara/ 
Parpati/LavanaBhasm a 
Satva/Sindura Karpu/ 
Uppu / Param 
150 sq. feet 
Bhatti, Karahi, Stainless Steel 
Vessels/Patila Flask, Multani 
Matti/Plaster of Par is, Copper 
Rod. Earthen container, Gaj put 
Bhatti. Muffle furnace (Electri -
cally operated) End/ Edge 
Runner, Exhaust Fan, Wooden 
/S.S. Spatula 
5. Kajal 100 sq. feet 
Earthen lamps for collection of 
Kajal. Tipple Roller Mill, End 
Runner, Sieve s, S.S. Pa tila, 
Filling/ packing and 
manufacturing room should be 
provided with exhaust fan and 
ultra violet lamps. 
6. Capsules 100 sq.feet Air Conditioner, Dehumidifier, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
S.No. Category of Medicine 
Minimum 
Manufacturing space 
required 
Machinery/equipment 
recommended 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
hygrometer. Thermometer, Cap-
sule filling machine and 
chemical balance 
7. Ointment/Marham Pasai 
100 sq.feet 

Tube filling machine, Crimping 
Machine /Ointment Mixer, End 
Runner/Mill (Where 
required),S.S. Storage Container 
S.S. Patila. 
8. 
Pak/Avaleh/Khand/Modak/ 
Lakayam 

100 sq.feet 

Bhatti section fitted with 
exhaust fan and should be fly 
proof, Iron Kadahi/S.S Patila 
and S.S. storage container 
9. 
Panak Syrup/ Pravahi 
Kwath Manapaku 

150 sq. feet 
Tinctum press, exhaust fan 
fitted and fly proof, Bhatti 
section. Bottle washing 
machine, filter press/Gravity 
filter liquid filling machine, P.P. 
Capping Machine 
10. Asava/Aristha 200 sq. feet 
Same as mentioned above. 
Fermentation tanks containers 
and Distillation plant where 
necessary, Filler Press 
11. Sura 100 sq.feet 
Same as mentioned above plus 
Distillation plant and Transfer 
pump 
12. Ark-Tinir 100 sq. feet 
Maceration tank, Distillation 
plant, Liquid filling tank with 
tap/gravity Filter/Filler press 
Visual inspection box 
13. Tail/Ghrit Ney 100 sq. feet 
Bhatti, Kadahi/S.S. Patila S.S. 
Storage containers, Filteration 
equipment, filling tank with 
tap/Liquid filling machine 
14. 
Aschyotan/Netra Malham 
Panir Karn Bindu, 
Nasabindu 
100. sq. feet 
Hot air oven electrically heated 
with thermostatic control, kettle 
gas or electrically heated with 
suitable mixing arrangements 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
S.No. Category of Medicine 
Minimum 
Manufacturing space 
required 
Machinery/equipment 
recommended 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
collation mill or ointment mill, 
tube filling equipment, mixing 
and storage tanks of stainless 
steel or of other suitable 
material sintered glass funnel, 
seitz filter or filter candle, liquid 
filling equipment, autoclave. 
15. 
Each manufacturing unit 
will have a separate area 
for Bhatti, furnaces, 
boilers, puta, etc. This will 
have proper ventilation, 
removal of smoke, 
prevention of flies, insects, 
dust etc. The furnace 
section could have tin roof. 
200 sq. feet 

B. LIST OF MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT AND MINIMUM 
MANUFACTURING PREMISES REQUIRED FOR THE 
MANUFACTURER OF VARIOUS CATEGORIES OF UNANI SYSTEM 
OF MEDICINES 
One machine indicated for one category of medicine could be used for the 
manufacturing of other category of medicine also. Similarly some of the 
manufacturing areas like powdering, furnace, packing of liquids could also be 
shared for these items. 
S.No. Category of Medicine 
Minimum 
Manufacturing space 
required 
Machinery/equipment 
recommended 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
 1200 square feet covered area 
with separate cabins partitions 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
S.No. Category of Medicine 
Minimum 
Manufacturing space 
required 
Machinery/equipment 
recommended 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
for each activity. If Unani 
medicines are manufactured in 
same premises an additional 
area of 400 sq. feet will be 
required. 
1. 
Itrifal 
Triyao/majoon/Laooq/ 
Jawarish Khamiras 
100 sq. feet 

Grinder/Pulverizer, Sieves, 
powder mixer (if required) , S.S. 
Patilas, Bhatti and other 
accessories, Plant mixer for 
Khamiras 
2. Arq. 100 sq. feet 
Dissilation Plant (Garembic) 
S.S. Storage Tank, Boiling 
Vessel, Gravity filter, Bottle 
Filling machine, Bottle washing 
machine, Bottle drier 
3. Habb(Pills) and tablets 100 sq. feet 
Ball Mill, Mass Mixer/Powder -
mixer Granulator drier, tablet 
compressing machine, pill/vati 
cutting machine, stainless steel 
trays/containers for storage and 
sugar coating polishing pan in 
case of sugar coated tablets, 
mechanised chattoo (for maxing 
of guggul) where required 
4. Sufoof (Powder) 200 sq. feet 
Grinder /Pulveriser, Seives 
Trays, Scoops, Powder Mixer, 
(Where required) 

5. Raughan (oils) (Crushing 
and boiling) 100 sq. feet 
Oil Expeller, S.S. Patilas, Oil 
filter bo ttle, Filling machine, 
Bottle drier, Bhatti 
6. Shiyaf, Surma, Kajal 100 sq. feet End runner, mixing S.S. Vessel 
7. Marham, Zimad (Ointment) 100 sq. feet 
Kharal, Bhatti, End runner, 
Grinder, Pulveriser, Tripple 
Roller Mill (if required) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
S.No. Category of Medicine 
Minimum 
Manufacturing space 
required 
Machinery/equipment 
recommended 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
8. 
Qurs (Tab) 

100 sq. feet 
Grinder/Pulveriser, Seives, 
Powder Mixer, (Where needed) 
Gra-nulator, Drier, Tablet 
Compressing Machine, Die 
punches Trays, O.T. Apparatus, 
Balance with weights, Scoops, 
Sugar Coating Pan, polishing 
pan, Heater 
9. 
Kushta 

100 sq. feet 
Bhatti, Kharal, Sil Batta, 
Earthen pots 

10. 
Murabba 

100 sq. feet 
Aluminium Vessels 50 -100 kgs. 
capacity, Gendna, Bhatti 

11. 
Capsule 

100 sq. feet 
Pulveriser, Powder Mixer, 
(Where needed), capsule filling 
machine, air conditioner, De -
humidifier, Balance with 
weights, storage -containers, 
glass 
12. 
Sharbat and Jushanda 

100 sq. feet 
Tinctum Press, exhaust fan 
fitted, Bhatti section, Bottle 
washing machine, Filter Press, 
Gravity filter Liquid filling t ank 
with tap/liquid filling machine, 
Hot air oven electrically heated 
with thermostatic control, 
Kettle 
13. 
Qutoor-e-Chashm and 
Marham (eye drops, eye 
ointment) 

100 sq. feet Hot air oven electrically heated 
with thermostatic control, Kettle 
14. 
Each manufacturing unit 
will have a separate area for 
Bhatti, furnaces, boilers, 
200 sq. feet 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
S.No. Category of Medicine 
Minimum 
Manufacturing space 
required 
Machinery/equipment 
recommended 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
putta, etc. This will have 
proper ventilation, removal 
of smoke, prevention of 
flies, insects, dust, etc. 
C. LIST OF EQUIPMENT RECOMMENDED FOR IN HOUSE 
QUALITY CONTROL SECTION 
(Alternatively unit can get the testing done from the government approved 
laboratory) 
(A) Chemistry section (B) Pharmacognosy section 
1. Alcohol Determination Apparatus (complete set). 1. Microscope Binocular 
2. Volatile Oil Determination Apparatus 2. Dissecting Microscope 
3. Boiling Point Determination Apparatus 3. Microtome 
4. Melting Point Determination Apparatus 4. Physical balance 
5. Refractometer 5. Aluminium Slide trays 
6. Polarimeter 6. Stage Micrometer 
7. Viscometer 7. Camera Lucida (Prism and Mirror Type). 
8. Tablet Disintegration Apparatus 8. Chemicals, Glass-ware, etc. 
9. Moisture Meter 
10. Muffle Furnace 
11. Electronic Balance 
12. Magnetic Stirrer 
13. Hot Air Oven 
14. Refrigerator 
15. Glass/Steel Distillation Apparatus 
16. LPG Gas Cylinders with Burners 
17. Water Bath (Temperature Controlled) 
18. Heating Mantles/Hot Plates 
19. TLC apparatus with all Accessories (Manual) 
20. Paper Chromatography apparatus with accessories. 
21. Sieve Size 10 to 120 with Sieve shaker 
22. Centrifuge machine 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
23. De-humidifier 
24. pH Meter 
25. Limit Test Apparatus 

1271[D. SUPPLEMENTARY GUIDELINES FOR MANUFACTURING OF 
RASAUSHADHIES OR RASAMARUNTHUKAL AND KUSHTAJAT 
(HERBO-MINERAL-METALLIC COMPOUNDS) OF AYURVEDA, 
SIDDHA AND UNANI MEDICINES 
These guidelines are intended to complement those provided above and 
should be read in conjunction with the parent guidelines. The supplementan/ 
guidelines are to provide general a nd minimum technical requirements for 
quality assurance and control in manufacturing Rasaushadhis or 
Rasamarunthukal and Kushtajat (Herbo -mineral-metallic formulations). These 
supplementary guidelines deal with Bhasmas, Sindura, Pishti, Kajjali, Khalviya 
Ras, Kupipakwa, Rasayan, Parpati, Potali Rasa, Satwa (of Metals and Minerals 
origin) Druti Parpam, Karpu, and Kushta etc. used in Ayurvedic, Siddha and 
Uaani Systems of medicine. 
The supplementary GMP guidelines for Rasaushadhi or Rasamarunthukal 
and Kushtajat are needed to establish the authenticity of raw drug, minerals and 
metals, in-process validation and quality control parameters to ensure that these 
formulation are processed and prepared in accordance with classical texts and 
for which safety measures are complied. Only those manufacturing units which 
have Good Manufacturing Practices for ASU drugs and supplementary 
certificate of Rasaushadhies or Rasamarunthukal and Kushtajat formulations 
shall be allowed to manufacture the same. Supplementary Good Ma nufacturing 
Practices certificate for Rasaushadhies shall be issued by the State Licensing 
Authority only after thorough inspection by an expert team including Rasashstra 
experts nominated by the Department of AYUSH. 
2. Manufacturing Process Areas. —For the manufacture of Bhasma and 
Kupipakawa and Rasaushadhi preparations made from metals and minerals the 
following specific areas shall be provided, which should be completely 
segregated from the production area used for preparation of plants and animal 
byproduct based formulation to avoid cross -contamination. The following 
exclusive areas are required for Rasaushadhies or Rasamarunthukal and 
Kushtajat:— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2.2. (a) Bhatti or Heating Devise section for Bhasma and Rasaushadhies. —
100 Sq. feet for heating, burning, p utta and any heat related work with proper 
ventilation, exhaust and chimney. This could be tin shed also. 
(b) Grinding, Drying and Processing section for Bhasma and 
Rasaushadhies.—100 Sq. feet (Manual or Mechanical, oven etc.). Drying 1 
[shall be] done in a space which is covered by glass or other transparent 
material to allow entry of sunrays on the material to keep for the purpose. If 
drying is being done in oven the temperature of the same may be selected 
specific temperature. 
(c) Rashaushadi Related Store.—100 Sq. feet. 
The size and dimensions of each Bhatti section would be so designed to suit 
the batch size or quantity of materials to be processed, keeping in mind the 
processing is done as per the conditions of Drug and Cosmetics Act mentioned 
under Schedule I official books. 
In addition to the fuels prescribed in the schedule books namely coal, fire 
wood, cow dung cakes etc., use of other heating devices e.g., electrical heating, 
oil or gas fired furnaces and others 1272[shall be] employed so as to provide the 
required temperature as per the nature of material and object of heating. 
Depending on the formulation being manufactured, manufacturers may adopt 
aerobic or anaerobic process. Properly baked and clean earthen pot s of other 
crucibles and glass containers or appropriate design shall be used. 
The manufacturing area should be designed with special attention to process 
the products that generate toxic fumes like S0 2 arsenic and mercury vapour, etc. 
When heating and boiling of the materials is necessary, suitable ventilation and 
air exhaust flow mechanism should be provided to prevent accumulation of 
unintended fumes and vapours. Such areas may be provided with properly 
designed chimneys or ducts fitted with exhaust syst em and suitable scrubbing 
system to remove fumes and smoke, so that safety of personnel and 
environment is taken care of. 
Since processing of Rasaushadhis may introduce heavy metal contamination 
and cross -contamination etc., therefore, cleaning of equipmen t is particularly 
important after every process by using appropriate cleaning agent which should 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
not react with material of equipment and must be free from unwanted properties 
e.g., corrosiveness. 
2.3 Records shall be maintained specially for temperatures attained during 
the entire process of Bhasmikaran, while employing different kinds of classical 
puta, furnaces using oil, gas or electricity. Appropriate temperature measuring 
instrument should be employed such as pyrometer and, pyrograph for manual 
reading or recording by heat sensors, connected to computer as the case may be. 
In order to handle large quantities, appropriate technology like use of hand 
operated extruders for making chakrikas or pellets may be adopted. However, 
such equipments made of aluminium or its alloys should not be used. 
Access to manufacturing areas shall be restricted to minimum number of 
authorized personal only. 
3. Quality Control.— 
A. In Process Quality Control: 
The registers as indicated below should exclusively be maintained fo r ready 
reference: 
(a) Shodhan Register with following details:— 
1. SI. No. 
2. Batch No. and Size 
3. Date, time and duration 
4. Name of the Raw-material with Quality reference and quantity 
5. Quantity of Shodhana Dravya 
6. Book Reference followed 
7. Methodology 
(b) Bhavana and Putta Register with following details:— 
1. SI. No. 
2. Batch No. 
3. Date, time 
4. Name of the material and quantity of starting materials 
5. Quantity of Nirvapya Dravya 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6. Quantity of Bhavana Dravya 
7. Date and Time of Starting and completion of Bhavana or Mardana 
and duration 
8. Type and Number of Puttas 
9. Time and Date of completion Puttas 
10. Colour and texture of the product or standards 
11. In process tests followed (Bhasma Pariksha and any other tests) 
12. In case heating at a particular temperature is required, record of 
attainment of that temperature. 
(c) Grinding Record Register. —(Finished Product/Intermediate 
procedure)— 
1. SI. No 
2. Batch No 
3. Date and time 
4. Name of the material and quantity 
5. Name of the equipment (SS/granite) 
6. Duration of grinding 
7. Repeat the grinding if required (Number of repetition) 
(d) Packing details— 
1. Name of Rasaushadhi 
2. Type of Dosage Form (e.g., Powder, pill, tablet etc.) 
3. Weight of Rasaushadhi in each unit. 
B. Product Quality Control: 
The specifications for finished Rasaushadhi are primarily intended to define 
the quality rather than to establish full characterization, and should focus on 
those characteristics found to be useful in ensuring the quality. Consistent 
quality for Rasaushdhi can only be assured if the starting material -metals and 
minerals are used of pharmacopoeial standards. In some cases more detailed 
information may be needed on aspects of their process. The manufacture will 
ensure in-house standards for the uniform quality of product. 
Quality testing will be carried out as per official Pharmacopoeia or Schedule 
books for texts namely, colour, taste, varitaratwa, Rekhapurnatwa, La ghutva, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Nirdhumatwa, Dutagre Kachakacha, Niruttha, Apunarbhava and 
Nischandratwa. 
The Particle size of the product should be tested by adopting microscope 
fitted with micrometer or particle size analyzer or any appropriate other 
techniques. Required physio-chemical characterization of the product should be 
undertaken by appropriate analytical equipment. The Standard Manufacturing 
Process of the product should be evolved/ follow up. The disintegration time of 
pills-vati and tablets should also be recorded. 
4. Product recalls.—Literature inserted inside the product package should 
indicate the name address of the manufacturing unit 1273[and] telephone number 
for reporting of any adverse drug reaction by physicians or patients. On receipt 
of such Adverse Drug Reaction report, it will be the responsibility of the 
manufacturer to ensure the recall the product from the market. 
Standard operating procedures (SOP) should be included for storage of 
recalled Rasaushadhies in a secure segre gated area, complying with the 
requirements specified for storage, till their final disposal. 
5. Medical examination of the employees. —Employees engaged in 
manufacturing should be medically examined periodically at least once a year 
for any adverse effe ct of the drug during manufacturing process for which 
necessary investigations 1274[shall be] carried out for ensuring that there is no 
effect of material on the vital organs of the employees. Annual examination 
reports of the e mployees shall be made available to statutory inspectors during 
Good Manufacturing Practices inspections. 
6. Self-Inspection.—The release of Rasaushadhis should be under the 
control of a person who has been trained in the specific features of the 
processing and quality assurance of Rasaushadhis. Personnel dealing with the 
production and quality assurance of Rasaushadhis manufacturing section should 
have an adequate training in the specific subject of Rasaushadhis 
manufacturing. He will be at least a degr ee holder in Ayurveda/ Siddha/Unani 
medicine or B. Pharma degree holder in Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani medicine. 
7. Dosage form of Rasaushadhi. —The Rasaushadhies may be made into 
an acceptable dosage forms such as, churna, vati, guti, tablet, capsule or 
Capsule etc., after adding suitable permissible fillers or binding agents as 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
permissible under the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India or Indian 
Pharmacopoiea as updated from time to time. In such cases the label must 
indicate the quantity of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani medicine in one Tablet or 
Pill or Capsule in addition to the filler. The crystalline product may be grinded 
before packing in the individual dispensing size". All the Rasushadhi or 
Rasamaruthukal or Kushtajat shall be packed in a dosage form which is ready 
for use for the consumer. Grinding and weighting of individual does of 
potentially poisonous products will not be permissible in patient consumer pack. 
This arrangement may reduce the Adverse Drug Reaction of Rasaushadhi which 
takes place due to does variation. However for hospital bulk pack, it will not be 
applicable and label will clearly indicate the "Hospital pack". 
8. Area Specifications/requirement for an applicant companies only to 
have GMP of Rasaushadhies or Rasamarunthukal and Kushtajat (He rbo-
mineral/metallic compounds) of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani medicines:— 
S. 
No. 
Category of Medicine/ 
Manufacturing area 
Minimum 
Manufacturing 
Space required 
(1500 sq. ft.) 
Machinery equipment 
recommended 
1. Pisti/Grinding area for 
Bhasma, Pishti, Kushtajat. 100 sq. ft. 
Kharal/mechanized/motorized 
Kharal, End runner/Ball -Mill 
Sieves/Shifter. 
2. 
Powdering area for raw drugs 
of plant origin giving in 
Rasaushadhies (Herbo-
metalic formulations) 
200 sq. ft. Grinder/Dis tin tegra tor/Pul 
verisar/Powder mixer/Sieves/ Shifter. 
3. Pills/Vati/Gutika Matrica and 
tablets/Habb making area. 100 sq. ft. 
Ball Mill, Mass Mixer/Powder mixer, 
Granulator drier, tablet compressing 
machine, pill/vati cutting machine, 
stainless steel trays/container for 
storage and sugar coati ng, polishing 
pan in case of sugar coted tablets, 
mechanized chatee, (for mixing of 
guggulu) where required. 
4. 
Kupi pakva /Ksara 
/Parpati/Lavana Bhasma 
Satva /Sindura Karpu/ 
Uppu/Param/Qushta/Jawhar 
150 sq. ft. 
Bhatti, Karahi/stainless steel 
vessels/patila flask, Multani Matti/ 
Plaster of Paris, Copper Rod, Earthen 
container, Gaj Put Bhatti, Muffle 
furnace (electrically operated) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
S. 
No. 
Category of Medicine/ 
Manufacturing area 
Minimum 
Manufacturing 
Space required 
(1500 sq. ft.) 
Machinery equipment 
recommended 
End/Edge Runner, Exhaust Fan, 
Wooden, S.S. Spatula. 
5. Receiving and storing raw 
material 200 sq. ft. 
6. Quality Control Section 150sq. ft. 
7. Quarantine/observation 50 sq. ft. 
8. Finished goods store 150 sq. ft. 
9. Rejected goods store 50 sq. ft. 
10. Bhatti-putta area 200 sq. ft. 
11. Area for water and washing 
etc. 50 sq. ft. 
12. Office 100 sq. ft. 
 Total 1500 Sq. ft.] 
Note.—The above requirements of machinery, equipments, space, are made 
subject to the modification at the discretion of the Licensing Authority; if he is 
of the opinion that having regard to the nature and extent of the manufacturing 
operations it is necessary to relax or alter then in the circumstances in a 
particular case 1275[he may do so after recording reasons in writing]. 

1276[SCHEDULE TA 
(See rule 157A) 
FORM FOR RECORD OF UTILIZATION OF RAW MATERIAL BY 
AYURVEDA OR SIDDHA OR UNANI LICENSED MANUFACTURING 
UNITS DURING THE FINANCIAL YEAR 
Identification Particulars: 
Manufacturing License No.................................... 
Issued by................................................................ 
Name..................................................................... 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Address................................................................. 
State........................................................................Pin Code................................. 
Telephone ...............................................Fax.......................................................... 
Email..................................................................... 
1. Quantity of Medicinal Plants/Extracts/Es sential Oils/Metals/Animal By -
Products/Minerals Used During 1st April, to 31st March, of the proceeding year 
(For Productions at the identified facility) 
(a) Herbs Used 
Common Name 
as in AFI/API* 
Plant's 
Botanical 
Name 
Quantity 
Used/per 
annum (in Kgs.) 
Sources of Supply Part Used 
Traders/ 
Manufacturers 
Forest 
Collectors Cultivators Imported Total Whole 
plants Root Leaf Others 

* Ayurvedic Formulary of India/Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India 
(b) Extracts Used 
Name of Extracts 
Quantity Used/per annum (in 
Kgs.) 
Sources of Supply 
Common Name as in 
AFI/API* 
Botanical 
Name In-House Export 
Suppliers Imported Total 

* Ayurvedic Formulary of India /Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India 
 (c) Metals/Minerals Used 
Name of Mineral 
Quantity Used/per annum (in Kgs.) 
Sources of Supply 
Common Name Chemical Name Manufacturers Traders (Domestic) Importers Total 

(d) Animal By-Products Used 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Name of By-Product 
Quantity Used/per annum 
(in Kgs.) 
Sources of Supply 
Common 
Name 
Biological /Chemical Name 
(if any) 
Manufacturers Traders 
(Domestic) Importers Total 

2. Shortage of raw material(s)/inputs during the preceding year. 
Yes No 
If yes, please indicate name(s) of such raw material(s) by level of 
importance starting from most important to least important, reason for shortage 
[availability, quality or any other (please specify)] 
Name of Raw Material Appro. Qty of 
shortage (in Kgs.) Reason 
Name of the drug and part used as 
mentioned in official formulary/ 
Pharmacopoeial/Schedule I books 
Biological/Chemical Name 
(if any) 

1277[SCHEDULE U 
 (See rules 74, 74A, 74B, 78 and 78A) 
I. PARTICULARS TO BE SHOWN IN MANUFACTURING RECORDS 
A. SUBSTANCES OTHER THAN PARENTERAL IN PRE PARATIONS IN 
GENERAL 
1. Serial number. 
2. Name of the product. 
3. Reference of Master Formula Records. 
4. Lot/Batch Size 
5. Lot/Batch Number. 
6. Date of commencement of manufacture and date of completion of 
manufacture and the assigned date of expiry. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
7. Name of ail ingredients, specifications quantities requires for the 
lot/Batch size and quantities actually used. All weighings and 
measurements shall be carried out by a responsible person and initialled 
by him and shall be counter check ed and signed by the competent 
technical staff under whose personal supervision the ingredients are 
used for manufacture. 
8. Control Numbers of raw materials used in the formulation. 
9. Date, time and duration of mixing. 
10. Details of environmental controls like room temperature, relative 
humidity. 
11. Date of granulation, wherever applicable. 
12. Theoretical weight and actual weight of granules/powder blend. 
13. Records of in-processes controls (Periodically whenever necessary). 
(a) Uniformity of mixing. 
(b) Moisture content of granules/powder in case of Tablet/Capsules. 
(c) pH of solution in case of liquid. 
(d) Weight variation. 
(e) Disintegration time. 
(f) Hardness. 
(g) Friability test. 
(n) Leak test in case of strip packing. 
(i) Filled volume of liquids. 
(j) Quantity of tablets/capsules in the final container. 
(k) Content of ointment in the filled containers. 
14. Date of compression in case of Tablets/date of filling in case of 
capsules. 
15. Date of sealing/coati ng/polishing in case of capsules/tablets wherever 
applicable. 
16. Reference to analytical Report number stating the result of test and 
analysis. 
17. Separate records of the disposal of the rejected batches and of batches 
withdrawn from the market. 
18. The theoretical yield and actual productions yield and packing 
particulars indicating the size and quantity of finished packings. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
19. Specimen of label/strip, carton with batch coding information like 
Batch Number, date of manufacture, date of expi ry, retail price as applicable, 
stamped thereon and inserts used in the finished packings. 
20. Signature with date of competent technical staff responsible for the 
manufacture. 
21. Counter signature of the head of the testing units or other approved 
person-in-charge of testing for having verified the batch records and for having 
released the batch for sale and distribution, the quantity released and date of 
release. 
22. Date of release of finished packings and quantity released for sale and 
distribution. 
23. Quantity transferred to warehouse. 
24. For Hypodermic tablets and ophthalmic preparations, which are 
required to be manufactured under aseptic conditions, records snail be 
maintained indicating the precautions taken during the process of m anufacture 
to insure that aseptic conditions are maintained. 
B. PARENTERAL PREPARATIONS 
1. Serial Number. 
2. Name of the product. 
3. Reference of the master formula record. 
4. Batch/Lot size. 
5. Batch No. and/or Lot No. 
6. Date of commencement of manufacture and date of completion. 
7. Names of all ingredients, specifications and quantity required for the 
Lot/Batch size and quantity actually used. All weighings and 
measurements shall be carried out by a responsible person and initialled 
by nim and shall be countersigned by the technical staff under whose 
personal supervision the stocks are issued and by another competent 
technical staff under whose supervision the ingredients are used for 
manufacture. 
8. Control numbers of raw materials used in the formulation. 
9. Date, time and duration of mixing. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
10. Details of environmental controls like temperature, humidity, microbial 
count in the sterile working areas. 
11. pH of the solution, wherever applicable. 
12. Date and method of filtration. 
13. Sterility test, reference on bulk batch wherever applicable 
14. Records of check on volume filled. 
15. Date of filling. 
16. Records of tests employed— 
(a) To ensure that sealed ampoules are leak proof. 
(b) To check the presence of foreign particles. 
(c) Pyrogen test, wherever applicable. 
(d) Toxicity test wherever applicable. 
17. Records of checking of instruments and apparatus of sterilisation 
(Indicators). 
18. Records of cleaning and sterilisation of containers and c losures, if 
necessary. 
19. Records of sterilisation in case of parenteral preparations which are 
heat sterilised including particulars of time, temperature and pressure employed. 
Such records should be marked to relate to the batch sterilised. 
20. Number and size of containers filled and quantity rejected. 
21. The theoretical yield and actual yield and the percentage yield thereof. 
22. Reference to Analytical report numbers stating whether of standard 
quality or otherwise. 
23. Specimen of lab els, cartons etc. with Batch coding information like 
batch number, date of manufacture, date of expiry,, as applicable, stamped 
thereon, and inserts used in the finished packings. 
24. Signature with date of the component technical staff responsible for 
manufacture. 
25. Particulars regarding the precautions taken during the manufacture to 
ensure that aseptic conditions are maintained. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
26. Counter—Signature of head of the testing unit or person in charge of 
testing for having verified the documents a nd for having released the product 
for sale ana distribution, the quantity released and date of release. 
27. Records for having transferred to warehouse giving packing and 
quantities. 
28. Separate records of the disposal of the rejected batches and o f all 
batches withdrawn from the market. 
29. Records of reprocessing if any and particulars of reprocessing. 
II. RECORDS OF RAW MATERIALS 
Records in respect of each raw material shall be maintained indicating the 
date of receipt, invoice number, name an d address of manufacturer/supplier, 
batch number, quantity received, pack size, date of manufacture, date of expiry, 
if any, date of analysis and release/rejection by quality control, analytical report 
number, with special remarks, if any, quantity issued, date of issue and the 
particulars of the name and batch numbers of products for the manufacture of 
which issued and the proper disposal of the stocks. 
III. PARTICULARS TO BE RECORDED IN THE ANALYTICAL 
RECORDS 
A. TABLETS AND CAPSULES 
1. Analytical report number. 
2. Name of the sample. 
3. Date of receipt of sample. 
4. Batch/Lot number. 
5. Protocols of tests applied. 
(a) Description. 
(b) Identification. 
(c) Uniformity of weight. 
(d) Uniformity of diameter (if applicable). 
(e) Disintegration test (time in minutes). 
(f) Any other tests. 
(g) Results of Assay. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Note.— Records regarding various tests applied (including readings and 
calculations) should be maintained and necessary reference to these records 
should be entered in Col. 5 above whenever necessary. 
6. Signature of the Analyst. 
7. Opinion and signature of the approved Analyst. 
B. PARENTERAL PREPARATIONS 
1. Analytical Report Number. 
2. Name of the sample. 
3. Batch number. 
4. Date of receipt of samples. 
5. Number of containers filled. 
6. Number of containers received 
7. Protocols of tests applied. 
(a) Clarity. 
(b) pH wherever applicable. 
(c) Identification. 
(d) Volume in container. 
(e) Sterility—(i) Bulk sample wherever applica ble (ii) container 
sample. 
(f) Pyrogen test, wherever applicable. 
(g) Toxicity test, wherever applicable. 
(n) Any other tests. 
(i) Results of Assay. 
Note.— Records regarding various tests applied (including readings and 
calculations) should be mainta ined and necessary reference to these records 
should be entered in Col. 7 above whenever necessary. 
8. Signature of the Analyst. 
9. Opinion and signature of the approved Analyst. 
PYROGEN TEST 
1. Test Report Number. 
2. Name of the sample. 
3. Batch number. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
4. Number of rabbits used. 
5. Weight of each rabbit. 
6. Normal temperature of each rabbit. 
7. Mean initial temperature of each rabbit. 
8. Dose and volume of solution injected into each rabbit and time of 
injection. 
10. Maximum Temperature. 
11. Response. 
12. Summed response. 
13. Signature of the Analyst. 
14. Opinion and signature of the approved Analyst. 
TOXICITY TEST 
1. Test Report Number. 
2. Name of the sample. 
3. Batch Number. 
4. Number of mice used and weight of each mouse. 
5. Strength and volume of the drugs injected. 
6. Date of injection. 
7. Results and remarks. 
8. Signature of Analyst. 
9. Opinion and signature of the approved Analyst. 
C. FOR OTHER DRUGS 
1. Analytical report number. 
2. Name of the sample. 
3. Batch/Lot number. 
4. Date of receipt of sample. 
5. Protocol of tests applied. 
(a) Description 
(b) Identification 
(c) Any other tests. 
(d) Results'-of Assay. 
Note.— Particulars regarding various tests applied (including readings and 
calculations) shall be maintained and necessary reference to these records shall 
be entered in Column 5 above, whenever necessary. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6. Signature of the Analyst. 
7. Opinion and signature of the approved Analyst. 
D. RAW MATERIALS 
1. Serial number. 
2. Name of the materials. 
3. Name of manufacturer/supplier. 
4. Quantity received. 
5. Invoice/Challan number and date. 
6. Protocols of tests applied. 
Note.— Particulars regarding various tests applied (includi ng readings and 
calculations) shall be maintained and necessary reference to these records shall 
be entered in Column 6 above, whenever necessary. 
E. CONTAINER, PACKING MATERIALS, ETC. 
1. Serial number. 
2. Name of the item. 
3. Name of the manufacturer/supplier 
4. Quantity received. 
5. Invoice/Challan number and date. 
6. Protocols of tests applied. 
Note.— Particulars regarding various tests applied shall be maintained and 
necessary reference to these records shall be entered in Column 6 above, 
whenever necessary. 
7. Remarks. 
8. Signature of the examiner. 
Note.—1. The foregoing provisions represent the minimum requirements to 
be complied with the licensee. The Licensing Authority, may how’ever, direct 
the nature of records to be main tained by the licensee for such products as are 
not covered by the categories described above. 
2. The Licensing Authority may permit the licensee to maintain records in 
such manner as are considered satisfactory, provided the basic requirements laid 
down above are complied with. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. The Licensing Authority may at its discretion direct the licensee to 
maintain records for such additional particulars as it may consider necessary in 
the circumstances of a particular case.] 
1278[SCHEDULE U (I) 
1278[***] 
1279[SCHEDULE V 
(See rule 124B) 
STANDARDS FOR PATENT OR PROPRIETARY MEDICINES 
1280[***] 
1281[2. Standards for patent or proprietary medicines, containing vitamins —
Patent or proprietary medicines containing vitamins for prophylactic, 
therapeutic or paediatric use shall contain the vitamins in quantities not less than 
and not more than those specified below in single or in two divided daily doses, 
namely:—[See table on next page]. 
1280[***] 
1282[4. General Standards for Different Categories of Patent or Proprietary 
Medicine—In the case of Pharmaceutical products contai ning several active 
ingredients, the selection shall be such that the ingredients do not interact with 
one another, and do not affect the safety and therapeutic efficacy of the product. 
The combination shall not also lead to analytical difficulties for the purpose of 
assaying the content of such ingredient separately. The substances added as 
additives shall be innocuous, shall not affect the safety or therapeutic efficacy of 
the active ingredients, and shall not affect the assays and identity tests in the 
amount present.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Vitamin Unit 
Patent or proprietary medicines 
containing vitamins for prophylactic 
use 
Patent or proprietary medicines 
containing vitamins for therapeutic use Patent or proprietary medicines containing vitamins for paediatric use 
(In single dose or in two divided doses) per daily dose 

For adults For infants less than one year For children above one year upto adults 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
Vitamin A I.U. Not less than 1,600 and not more than 
2,500. 
Not less than 5,000 and not more than 
10,000. 
Not less than 750 and not more than 
3,000. 
Not less than 1,500 and not more than 
5,000. 
Vitamin D I.U. Not less than 100 and not more than 
200. 
Not less than 400 and not more than 
1,000. 
Not less than 200 and not more than 
400. Not less than 100 and not more than 400. 
Vitamin B1 mg. Not less than 1 and not more than 2. Not less than 4.5 and not 
more than 10. Not less than 0.5 and not more than 1. Not less than 1 and not more than 4.5. 
Vitamin B2 mg. Not less than 1 and not more than 3 Not less than 5 and not more than 10. Not less than 0.5 and not more than 1.5. Not less than 1 and not more than 5. 
Vitamin B6 mg. Not less than 0.5 and not more than 
1.5. Not less than 1.5 and not more than 3. Not less than 0.5 and not more than 1.5. Not less than 1 and not more than 3. 
Niacinamide mg. Not less than 15 and not more than 26. Not less than 45 and not more than 100. Not less than 5 and not more than 15. Not less than 10 and not more than 40. 
d —Pantothenic 
acid or its salts 
and panthenol 
mg. Not less than 1 and not more than 5. Not less than 5 and not more than 50. Not less than 1 and not more than 3. Not less than 2.5 and not more than 10. 
Folic acid mg. Not less than 50 and not more than 
300. 
Not less than 1,000 and not more than 
1,500. Not less than 25 and not more than 100. Not less than 100 and not more than 500. 
Vitamin B12 1283[mcg] Not less than 05 and not more than 
1.0. Not less than 5 and not more than 15. Not less than 1 and not more than 3. Not less than 1 and not more than 5. 
Vitamin C mg Not less than 25 and not more than 50. Not less than 75 and not more than 150. Not less than 20 and not more than 40. Not less than 30 and not more than 80. 
Vitamin E I.U. Not less than 5 and not more than 10. Not less than 15 and not more than 25. Not less than 2.5 and not more than 10. Not less than 5 and not more than 20 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 

Note 1.—Patent or proprietary medicines containing vitamins intended for prophylactic, therapeutic or paediatric use shall bear on the label the words "For 
Prophylactic Use", "For Therapeutic Use" or "For Paediatric Use" as the case may be. In the cases of paediatric preparations the age of the infant or the 
child for whose use it is intended, shall be given in addition to the particulars required to be given under these rules. 
Note 2.—The above standards shall not apply to any preparation containing a single vitamin only and also to any preparation containin g vitamins intended 
for parenteral use : 
Provided, however, that in the case of patent or proprietary medicines containing vitamins which are intended for the treatment of certain specific conditions 
or diseases, the Licensing Authority specified in clause (b) or Rule 21, may permit the addition of vitamins therein in relax ation of the limits specified above, 
if satisfactory evidence is produced in justification of such relaxation.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Subject to the provisions of these rules, patent or proprietary medicines shall 
comply with the following standards, namely:— 
1. Patent or proprietary medicines shall comply with the general requirements 
of the dosage form under which it falls as given in the Indian Pharmacopoeia. If 
the dosage form is not included in the Indian Pharmacopoeia, but is included in 
any other pharmacopoeia, prescribed for the purpose of the Second Sch edule to 
the Act, it shall comply with the general requirements of the dosage of such 
pharmacopoeia. Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
requirements, general requirements shall include compliance with colour 
consistency, clarity, stabilit y, freedom from contamination with foreign matter 
or fungal growth, defects like chipping and capping of tablets, cracking of the 
coating, mottled appearance and other characteristic defects that can be 
perceived by visual inspection. 
2. Without prejudice to the generality of the following paras, dosage forms of 
patent or proprietary medicines shall comply with the following requirements, 
namely:— 
(a) Tablets : Medicines shall comply with requirements for tablets as laid 
down in the Indian Pharmacopoe ia. The nature of coating shall be indicated on 
the label. Permitted colours may, however, be added and declared on the label. 
Nature of tablets, such as uncoated, sugar coated or filmcoated, shall also be 
declared on the label. 
1284[***] 
(b) Capsules : Medicines shall comply with the requirements for capsules laid 
down in the Indian Pharmacopoeia. However, the capsules, shall be free from 
distortion of shape, discolouration and other physical defects like leakage of 
power joints, pinholes or cracks in the capsules; 
(c) Liquid oral dosage forms : Emulsions and suspensions shall dispose 
uniformly on shaking. Homogeneous solutions shall contain no sediments. The 
volume of the product (net content) in the container shall be not less than the 
labelled volume. The limited for ethanol content of pharmaceutical products 
shall be not less than 90 per cent and not more than 110 per cent of the labelled 
contents. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(d) Injections : Medicines shall comply with the requirements for injections as 
laid down in the Indian Pharmacopoeia. 
(e) Ointments : Medicines shall comply with the requirements for ointments 
as laid down in Indian Pharmocopoeia. 
3. The content of active ingredients, other than vitamins, enzymes and 
antibiotics, in patent or proprietary medicines shall be not less than 90 per cent 
and not more than 110 per cent of the labelled content; however, for enzymes 
and vitamins, only for lower limit of 90 per cent shall apply. In all dry 
formulations containing antibiotics, th e limit shall be 90 to 130 per cent of the 
labelled contents and in case of liquid antibiotic formulations, the limit shall be 
90 to 140 per cent of labelled contents. 
Fiducial limits for error for microbiological assay of antibiotics may be 
estimated depe nding upon the design of assay procedure. Methods used for 
assaying active ingredients shall employ the same basic principles and shall use 
same organisms as given in the latest edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia or 
shall follow any other methods as appro ved by the authority competent to grant 
licence to manufacture. 
4. All patent or proprietary medicines containing aspirin shall be subjected to 
"Free Salicylic Acid Test" and the limit of such acid shall be 0.75 per cent. 
Except in case of soluble type aspiring in which case the limit of such acid shall 
be 3 per cent. 
5. Patent or proprietary medicine to be tested under the provisions of rule 
121A for pyrogen shall be tested by injecting into rabbits not less than the 
human dose of the medicine based on body weight of a 60 kg. human being. 
Methodology and limits shall be based on the method recorded in the Indian 
Pharmacopoeia. Dose selected shall be indicated in the protocol but the dose 
shall be not greater than 5 times the human dose based on body weight of 60 kg. 
for man. 
6. In injectable patent or proprietary medicines, the test for freedom from 
toxicity, shall be performed as described in the Indian Pharmacopoeia. Dose 
selected shall be indicated in the protocol but the dose shall not be less than five 
times the human dose based on body weight of 60 kg. human being.] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1285[***] 
1286[SCHEDULE X 
 (See rules 23, 61, 75, 97 and 105A) 
Amobarbital 
Glutethimide 
Pentobarbital 
1287[Ketamine 
hydrochloride] 
Amphetamine 
Meprobamate 
Phencyclidine 
Barbital 
Methamphetamine 
Phenometrazine 
Cyclobarbital 
1288[***] 
1289[***] 
Dexamphetamine 
Methylphenidate 
Secobarbital 
Ethclorvynol 
Methylphenobarbital 

Notes.—l.Any stereiosometric form of the substance specified in this Schedule, 
any salt of the substance and preparation containing such substances are also 
covered by this Schedule. 
2. Preparations containing the above substances are also covered by this 
Schedule: 
Provided, however, preparations containing Meprobamate 1289[***] in 
combination with other drugs may be exempted by the Licensing Authority 
specified in clause (b) of rule 21, from the provisi ons of this Schedule, if 
satisfactory evidence is adduced that these preparations are not liable to be 
misused.] 
1290[SCHEDULE Y 
[See rules 122A, 122B, 122D, 122DA, 122DAA and 122E] 
REQUIREMENTS AND GUIDELINES FOR PERMISSION TO IMPORT 
AND/OR MANUFACTURE OF NEW DRUGS FOR SALE OR TO 
UNDERTAKE CLINICAL TRIALS 
1. Application for permission .—(1) Application for permission to import or 
manufacture new drugs for sale or to undertake clinical trials shall be made in 
Form 44 accompanied with following data in accordance with the appendices, 
namely:— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(i) chemical and pharmaceutical information as prescribed in Item 2 of 
Appendix I; 
(ii) animal pharmacology data as prescribed in Item 3 of Appendix I and 
Appendix IV; 
(a) specific p harmacological actions as prescribed in Item 3.2 of 
Appendix I, and demonstrating, therapeutic potential for humans shall be 
described according to the animal models and species used. Wherever 
possible, dose -response relationships and ED 50s shall be submi tted. 
Special studies conducted to elucidate mode of action shall also be 
described (Appendix IV); 
(b) general pharmacological actions as prescribed in Item 3.3 of 
Appendix I and Item 1.2 of Appendix IV; 
(c) pharmacokinetic data related to the absorp tion, distribution, 
metabolism and excretion of the test substance as prescribed in Item 3.5 
of Appendix I. Wherever possible, the drug effects shall be corelated to 
the plasma drug concentrations; 
(iii) animal toxicology data as prescribed in Item 4 of Appendix I and 
Appendix III; 
(iv) human Clinical Pharmacology Data as prescribed in Items 5, 6 and 7 of 
Appendix I and as stated below: 
(a) for new drug substances discovered in India, clinical trials are 
required to be carried out in India right fr om Phase I and data should be 
submitted as required imder Items 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 (data, if any, from other 
countries) and 9 of Appendix I; 
(b) for new drug substances discovered in countries other than Indio, 
Phase I data as required under Items 1, 2, 3, 4 , 5 (data from other 
countries) and 9 of Appendix I should be submitted alongwith the 
application. After submission of Phase I data generated outside India to 
the Licensing Authority, permission may be granted to repeat Phase I 
trials and/or to conduct Pha se II trials and subsequently Phase III trials 
concurrently with other global trials for that drug. Phase III trials are 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
required to be conducted in India before permission to market the drug in 
India is granted; 
(c) the data required will depend upon t he purpose of the new drug 
application. The number of study subjects and sites to be involved in the 
conduct of clinical trial will depend upon the nature and objective of the 
study. Permission to carry out these trials shall generally be given in 
stages, considering the data emerging from earlier Phase(s); 
(d) application for permission to initiate specific phase of clinical trial 
should also accompany Investigator's brochure, proposed protocol 
(Appendix X), case record form, study subject's informed co nsent 
document(s) (Appendix V), investigator's undertaking (Appendix VII) 
and ethics committee clearance, if available (Appendix VIII); 
(e) reports of clinical studies submitted under Items 5 -8 of Appendix I 
should be in consonance with the format prescribed in Appendix II of this 
Schedule. The study report shall be certified by the Principal Investigator 
or, if no Principal Investigator is designated, then by each of the 
Investigators participating in the study. The certification should 
acknowledge the contents of the report, the accurate presentation of the 
study as undertaken, and express agreement with the conclusions. Each 
page should be numbered; 
(v) regulatory status in other countries as prescribed in Item 9.2 of Appendix 
I, including information in respect of restrictions imposed, if any, on the use of 
the drug in other countries, e.g. dosage limits, exclusion of certain age groups, 
warning about adverse drug reactions, etc. (Item 9.2 of Appendix I). Likewise, 
if the drug has been withdrawn in any country by the manufacturer or by 
regulatory authorities, such information should also be furnished along with 
the reasons and their relevance, if any, to India. This information must 
continue to be submitted by the sponsor to the Licensing Authority d uring the 
course of marketing of the drug in India; 
(vi) the full prescribing information should be submitted as part of the new 
drug application for marketing as prescribed in Item 10 of Appendix I. The 
prescribing information (package insert) shall comprise the following sections: 
generic name; composition, dosage form/s; indications; dose and method of 
administration; use in special populations (such as pregnant women, lactating 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
women, pediatric patients, geriatric patients etc.); contra-indications; warnings; 
precautions; drug interactions; undesirable effects; overdose; 
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties; incompatibilities; shelf -
life; packaging information; storage and handling instructions. All package 
inserts, promotional literature an d patient education material subsequently 
produced are required to be consistent with the contents of the approved full 
prescribing information. The drafts of label and carton texts should comply 
with provisions of Rules 96 and 97. After submission and app roval by the 
Licensing Authority, no changes in the package insert shall be effected without 
such changes being approved by the Licensing Authority; and 
(vii) complete testing protocol/s for quality control testing together with a 
complete impurity prof ile and release specifications for the product as 
prescribed in Item 11 of Appendix I should be submitted as part of new drug 
application for marketing. Samples of the pure drug substance and finished 
product are to be submitted when desired by the regulatory authority. 
(2) If the study drug is intended to be imported for the purposes of 
examination, test or analysis, the application for import of small quantities of 
drugs for such purpose should also be made in Form 12. 
(3) For drugs indicated in lif e threatening/serious diseases or diseases of 
special relevance to the Indian health scenario, the toxicological and clinical 
data requirements may be abbreviated, deferred or omitted, as deemed 
appropriate by the Licensing Authority. 
2. Clinical Trial 
(1) Approval for Clinical trial— 
(i) Clinical trial on a new drug shall be initiated only after the 
permission has been granted by the Licensing Authority under Rule 
21(b), and the approval obtained from the respective ethics 
committee(s). The Licensing Au thority as defined shall be informed 
of the approval of the respective institutional ethics committee(s) as 
prescribed in Appendix VIII, and the trial initiated at each respective 
site only after obtaining such an approved for that site. The trial 
site(s) may accept the approval granted to the protocol by the ethics 
committee of another trial site or the approval granted by an 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
independent ethics committee (constituted as per Appendix VIII), 
provided that the approving ethics committee(s) is/are willing to 
accept their responsibilities for the study at such trial site(s) and the 
trial site(s) is/are willing to accept such an arrangement and that the 
protocol version is same at all trial sites. 
(ii) All trial Investigator(s) should possess appropriate quali fications, 
training and experience and should have access to such 
investigational and treatment facilities as are relevant to the 
proposed trial protocol. A qualified physician (or dentist, when 
appropriate) who is an investigator or a sub -investigator for the trial, 
should be responsible for all trial -related medical (or dental) 
decisions. 
Laboratories used for generating data for clinical trials should be 
compliant with Good Laboratory Practices. If services of a 
laboratory or a facilities outside the cou ntry are to be availed, 
its/their name(s), address(es) and specific services to be used should 
be stated in the protocol to avail Licensing Authority's permission to 
send clinical trial related samples to such laboratory(ies) and/or 
facility(ies). In all c ases, information about laboratory(ies)/facilities 
to be used for the trial, if other than those at the investigation site(s), 
should be furnished to the Licensing Authority prior to initiation of 
trial at such site(s). 
(iii) Protocol amendments if become necessary before initiation or during 
the course of a clinical trial, all such amendments should be notified 
to the Licensing Authority in writing along with the approval by the 
Ethics Committee which has granted the approval for the study. No 
deviations from or changes to the protocol should be implemented 
without prior written approval of the ethics committee and the 
Licensing Authority except when it is necessary to eliminate 
immediate hazards to the trial subject(s) or when change(s) 
involve(s) only log istic or administrative aspects of the trial. All 
such exceptions must be immediately notified to the ethics 
committee as well as to the Licensing Authority. Administrative 
and/or logistic changes in the protocol should be notified to the 
Licensing Authority within 30 days. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(2) Responsibilities of Sponsors— 
(i) The clinical trial sponsor is responsible for implementing and 
maintaining quality assurance systems to ensure that the clinical trial 
is conducted and data generated, documented and reported in 
compliance with the protocol and Good Clinical Practice (GCP). 
Guidelines issued by the Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organization, Directorate -General of Health Services, Government 
of India as well as with all applicable statutory provisions. Standard 
operating procedures should be documented to ensure compliance 
with GCP and applicable regulations. 
(ii) Sponsors are required to submit a status report on the clinical trial to 
the Licensing Authority at the prescribed periodicity. 
(iii) In case of st udies prematurely discontinued for any reason 
including lack of commercial interest in pursuing the new drug 
application, a summary report should be submitted within 3 months. 
The summary report should provide a brief description of the study, 
the number o f patients exposed to the drug, dose and duration of 
exposure, details of adverse drug reactions (Appendix XI), if any, 
and the reason for discontinuation of the study or non -pursuit of the 
new drug application. 
1291[(iv) Any re port of the serious adverse event, after due analysis shall 
be forwarded by the sponsor to the Licensing Authority as referred 
to in clause (b) of rule 21, the Chairman of the Ethics Committee 
and the head of the institution where the trial has been conduc ted, 
within fourteen days of the occurrence of the serious adverse event.] 
1292[(v) in case of injury or death occurring to the clinical trial subject, the 
Sponsor (whether a pharmaceutical company or an Institution) or his 
representative, whosoever nad obtained permission from the 
Licensing Authority for conduct of the clinical trial, shall make 
payment for medical management of the subject and also provide 
financial compensation for the clinical trial related injury or death in 
the manner as prescribed in Appendix XII;] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1293[(vi) the Sponsor (whether a pharmaceutical company or an 
Institution) or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission 
from the Licensing Authority for conduct of the clin ical trial, shall 
submit details of compensation provided or paid for clinical trial 
related injury or death, to the Licensing Authority within thirty days 
of the receipt of the order of the Licensing Authority.] 
1294[(3)(i)] Responsibilities of the Investigator(s)— 
The Investigator(s) shall be responsible for the conduct of the trial 
according to the protocol and the GCP Guidelines and also for 
compliance as per the undertaking given in Appendix VII. Standard 
operating procedure s are required to be documented by the 
investigate 3 for the tasks performed by them. During and following 
a subject's participation in a trial, the investigator should ensure that 
adequate medical care is provided to the participant for any adverse 
events. Investigator(s) shall report all serious and unexpected 
adverse events to the 1295[Licensing Authority defined under clause 
(b) of rule 21, the Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had 
obtained permission from the Licensing Authority for conduct of the 
clinical trial, and the Ethics Committee that accorded approval to the 
study protocol, within twenty four hours of their occurrence. 1296[In 
case, the Investigator fails to report any serious adver se event within 
the stipulated period, he shall have to furnish tne reason for the delay 
to the satisfaction of the Licensing Authority along with the report of 
the serious adverse event. The report of the serious adverse event, 
after due analysis, shall b e forwarded by the Investigator to the 
Licensing Authority as referred to in clause (b) of rule 21, the 
Chairman of the Ethics Committee and the Head of the institution 
where the trial has been conducted within fourteen days of the 
occurrence of the serious adverse event.]]. 
1297[(ii) The Investigator shall provide information to the clinical trial 
subject through informed consent process as provided in Appendix 
V about the essential elements of the clinical trial and the subject 's 
right to claim compensation in case of trial related injury or death. 
He shall also inform the subject or his/her nominee(s) of their rights 
to contact the Sponsor or his representative whosoever had obtained 
permission from the Licensing Authority for conduct of the clinical 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
trial for the purpose of making claims in the case of trial related 
injury or death.] 
(4) Informed Consent— 
(i) In all trials, a freely given, informed, written consent is required to 
be obtained from each study subject. The Inve stigator must provide 
information about the study verbally as well as using a patient 
information sheet, in a language that is non -technical and 
understandable by the study subject. The subject's consent must be 
obtained in writing using an 'Informed Conse nt Form'. Both the 
patient information sheet as well as the Informed Consent Form 
should have been approved by the ethics committee and furnished to 
the Licensing Authority. Any changes in the informed consent 
documents should be approved by the ethics com mittee and 
submitted to the Licensing Authority before such changes are 
implemented. 
(ii) Where a subject is not able to give informed consent (e.g. an 
unconscious person or a minor or those suffering from severe mental 
illness or disability), the same may be obtained from a legally 
acceptable representative [a legally acceptable representative is a 
person who is able to give consent for or authorize an intervention in 
the patient as provided by the law(s) of India]. If the subject or 
his/her legally acc eptable representative is unable to read/write - an 
impartial witness should be present during the entire informed 
consent process who must append his/her signatures to the consent 
form. 
(iii) A checklist of essential elements to be included in the study subject 
s informed consent document as well as a format for the Informed 
Consent Form for study subjects is given in Appendix V. 
1298[(iv) An audio-video recording of the informed consent process in case 
of vulnerable subjects in clinical trials of New Chemical Entity or 
New Molecular Entity including procedure of providing information 
to the subject and his understanding on such consent, shall be 
maintained by the investigator for record: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
 Provided that in case of clinical trial of anti -HIV and anti -
Leprosy drugs, only audio recording of the informed consent process 
of individual subject including the procedure of providing 
information to the subject and his understanding on such consent 
shall De maintained by the investigator for record.] 
(5) Responsibilities of the Ethics Committee— 
(i) It is the responsibility of the ethics committee that reviews and 
accords its approval to a trial protocol to safeguard the rights, safety 
and well being of all trial subjects. The ethics committee should 
exercise particular care to protect the rights, safety and well being of 
all vulnerable subjects participating in the study, e.g., members of a 
group with hierarchical structure (e.g. prisoners, armed forces 
personnel, staff and students of medical, nursing and pharmacy 
academic institutions), patients with incurable diseases, unemployed 
or impoverished persons, patients in emergency situation, ethnic 
minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, minors or 
others incapable of person ally giving consent. Ethics committee(s) 
should get document 'standard operating procedures' and should 
maintain a record of its proceedings. 
(ii) Ethics Committee(s) should make, at appropriate intervals, an 
ongoing review of the trials for which they review the protocol(s). 
Such a review may be based on the periodic study progress reports 
furnished by the investigators and/or monitoring and internal audit 
reports furnished by the sponsor and/or by visiting the study sites. 
(iii) In case an ethics committee revokes its approval accorded to a trial 
protocol, it must record the reasons for doing so ana at once 
communicate such a decision to the Investigator as well as to the 
Licensing Authority. 
1299[(iv) In case of serious a dverse event occurring to the clinical trial 
subject, the Ethics Committee shall forward its report on the serious 
adverse event, after due analysis, along with its opinion on the 
financial compensation, if any, to be paid by the Sponsor or his 
representative, whosoever had obtained permission from the 
Licensing Authority as referred to in clause (b) of rule 21 for 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
conducting the clinical trial, to the Licensing Authority within thirty 
days of the occurrence of the serious adverse event.] 
1300[5(A) Serious Adverse Events— 
(1) A serious adverse event is an untoward medical occurrence during 
clinical trial that is associated with death, in patient hospitalisation 
(in case the study was being conducted on out -patient), prolongation 
of hospitalisation (in case the study was being conducted on in -
patient), persistent or significant disability or incapacity, a 
congenital anomaly or birth defect or is otherwise life threatening. 
(2) The Investigator shall report all serious 1301[***] adverse events to 
the Licensing Authority as defined under clause (b) of rule 21, the 
Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission 
from the Licensing Authority for conduct of the clinical trial, and the 
Ethics Committee that accorded approval to the study protocol, 
within twenty four hours of their occurrence as per Appendix XI, 
and the said Licensing Authority shall determine the cause of injury 
or death as per the procedure prescribed under Appendix XII an d 
pass orders as deemed necessary.] 1302[ln case, the Investigator fails 
to report any serious adverse event within the stipulated period, he 
shall have to furnish the reason for the delay to the satisfaction of the 
Licensing Au thority along with the report of the serious adverse 
event.] 
(6) Human Pharmacology (Phase I)— 
(i) The objective of studies in this phase is the estimation of safety and 
tolerabiiity with the initial administration of an investigational new 
drug into hu man(s). Studies in this phase of development usually 
have non -therapeutic objectives and may be conducted in heallhy 
volunteers subjects or certain types of patients. Drugs will, 
significant potential toxicity e.g. cytotoxic drugs are usually studied 
in pa tients. Phase I trials should preferably be carried out by 
investigators trained in clinical pharmacology with access to the 
necessary facilities to closely observe and monitor the subjects. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(ii) Studies conducted in Phase I, usually intended to involve one or a 
combination of the following objectives:— 
(a) Maximum Tolerated Dose: To determine the tolerabiiity of the 
dose range expected to be needed later clinical studies and to 
determine tlie nature of adverse reactions that can be expected. 
These st udies include both single and multiple dose 
administration. 
(b) Pharmacokinetics, i.e., characterization of drug's absorption, 
distribution, metabolism and excretion. Although these studies 
continue throughout the development plan, they should be 
performed to support formulation development and determine 
pharmacokinetic parameters in different age groups to support 
dosing recommendations. 
(c) Pharmacodynamics: Depending on the drug and the endpoints 
studied, pharmacodynamic studies and studies relatin g to drug 
blood levels (pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic studies) may 
be conducted in healthy volunteer subjects or in patients with 
the target disease. If there are appropriate validated indicators 
of activity and potential efficacy, pharmacodynamic data 
obtained from patients may guide the dosage and dose regimen 
to be applied in later studies. 
(d) Early Measurement of Drug Activity: Preliminary studies of 
activity or potential therapeutic benefit may be conducted in 
Phase I as a secondary objective. Such studies are generally 
performed in later phases but may be appropriate when drug 
activity is readily measurable with a short duration of drug 
exposure in patients at this early stage. 
(7) Therapeutic Exploratory Trials (Phase II)— 
(i) The primary obj ective of Phase II trials is to evaluate the 
effectiveness of a drug for a particular indication or indications in 
patients with the condition under study and to determine the 
common short-term side-effects and risks associated with the drug. 
Studies in Ph ase II should be conducted in a group of patients who 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
are selected by relatively narrow criteria leading to a relatively 
homogeneous population. These studies should be closely 
monitored. An important goal for this phase is to determine the 
dose(s) and reg imen for Phase m trials. Doses used in Phase II are 
usually (but not always) less than the highest doses used in Phase I. 
(ii) Additional objectives of Phase II studies can include evaluation of 
potential study endpoints, therapeutic regimens (including 
concomitant medications) and target populations (e.g. mild versus 
severe disease) for further studies in Phase II or Phase III. These 
objectives may be served by exploratory analyses, examining 
subsets of data and by including multiple endpoints in trials. 
(iii) If the application is for conduct of clinical trials as a part of multi -
national clinical development of the drug, the number of sites and 
the patients as well as the justification for undertaking such trials in 
India shall be provided to the Licensing Authority. 
(8) Therapeutic Confirmatory Trials (Phase III)— 
(i) Phase III studies have primary objective of demonstration or 
confirmation of therapeutic benefit(s). Studies in Phase III are 
designed to confirm the preliminary evidence accumul ated in Phase 
II that a drug is safe and effective for use in the intended indication 
and recipient population. These studies should be intended to 
provide an adequate basis for marketing approval. Studies in Phase 
III may also further explore the dose -response relationships 
(relationships among dose, drug concentration in blood and clinical 
response), use of the drug in wider populations, in different stages of 
disease, or the safety and efficacy of the drug in combination with 
other drug(s). 
(ii) For d rugs intended to be administered for long periods, trials 
involving extended exposure to the drug are ordinarily conducted in 
Phase III, although they may be initiated in Phase II. These studies 
carried out in Phase III complete the information needed to s upport 
adequate instructions for use of the drug (prescribing information). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(iii) For new drugs approved outside India, Phase III studies need to be 
carried out primarily to generate evidence of efficacy and safety of 
the drug in Indian patients when us ed as recommended in the 
prescribing information. Prior to conduct of Phase III studies in 
Indian subjects, Licensing Authority may require pharmacokinetic 
studies to be undertaken to verify that the data generated in Indian 
population is in conformity with the data already generated abroad. 
(iv) If the application is for the conduct of clinical trials as a part of 
multi national clinical development of the drug, the number of sites 
and patients as well as the justification for undertaking such trials in 
India should be provided to the Licensing Authority along with the 
application. 
(9) Post Marketing Trials (Phase IV)— 
Post Marketing trials are studies (other than routine surveillance) performed 
after drug approval and related to the approved indication( s). These trials go 
beyond the prior demonstration of the drug's safety, efficacy and dose 
definition. These trials may not be considered necessary at the time of new drug 
approval but may be required by the Licensing Authority for optimizing the 
drug's use. They may be of any type but should have valid scientific objectives. 
Phase IV trials include additional drug -drug interaction(s), dose -response or 
safety studies and trials designed to support use under the approved 
indication(s), e.g. mortality/morbidity studies, epidemiological studies, etc. 
3. Studies in Special Populations. —Information supporting the use of the 
drug in children, pregnant women, nursing women, elderly patients, patients 
with renal or other organ systems failure, and those on specific concomitant 
medication is required to be submitted if relevant to the clinical profile of the 
drug and its anticipated usage pattern. Any claim sought to be made for the drug 
product that is not based on data submitted under preceding items of this 
Schedule should be supported by studies included under this item of the 
Schedule (Appendix I, Item 8.3). 
(1) Geriatrics—Geriatric patients should be included in Phase III clinical 
trials (and in Phase II trials, at the sponsor's option) in meaningful numbers, if— 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) the disease intended to be treated is characteristically a disease of 
aging; or 
(b) the population to be treated is known to include substantial numbers 
of geriatric patients; or 
(c) when there is specific reason to expect that conditions common in 
the elderly are likely to be encountered; or 
(d) when the new drug is likely to alter the geriatric patient's response 
(with regard to safety or efficacy) compared with that of the non -
geriatric patient. 
(2) Paediatrics.—(i) The timing of p aediatric studies in the new drug 
development program will depend on the medicinal product, the type of disease 
being treated, safety considerations, and the efficacy and safety of available 
treatments. For a drug expected to be used in children, evaluatio ns should be 
made in the appropriate age group. When clinical development is to include 
studies in children, it is usually appropriate to begin with older children before 
extending the trial to younger children and then infants. 
(ii) If the new drug is for diseases predominantly or exclusively affecting 
paediatric patients, clinical trial data should be generated in the paediatric 
population except for initial safety and tolerability data, which will usually be 
obtained in adults unless such initial safe ty studies in adults would yield little 
useful information or expose them to inappropriate risk. 
(iii) If the new drug is intended to treat serious or life -threatening diseases, 
occurring in both adults and paediatric patients, for which there are curre ntly no 
or limited therapeutic options, paediatric population should be included in the 
clinical trials early, following assessment of initial safety data and reasonable 
evidence of potential benefit. In circumstances where this is not possible, lack 
of data should be justified in detail. 
(iv) If the new drug has a potential for use in paediatric patients - 
paediatric studies should be conducted. These studies may be initiated at various 
phases of clinical development or after post-marketing surveillance in adults if a 
safety concern exists. In cases where there is limited paediatric data at the time 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
of submission of application -more data in paediatric patients would be 
expected after marketing authorisation for use in children is granted. 
(v) The paediatric studies should include— 
(a) clinical trials, 
(b) relative bioequivalence comparisons of the paediatric formulation 
with the adult formulation performed in adults, and 
(c) definitive pharmacokinetic studies for dose: selection across the age 
ranges of paediatric patients in whom the drug is likely to be used. 
These studies should be conducted in the paediatric patient 
population with the disease under study. 
(vi) If the new r drug is a major therapeutic advance for the paediatric 
population -the studies should begin early in the drug development, and this 
data should be submitted with the new drug application. 
(vii) Paediatric subjects are legally unable to provide written informed 
consent, and are dependent on their parent(s)/legal guardian t o assume 
responsibility for their participation in clinical studies. Written informed 
consent should be obtained from the parent/legal guardian. However, all 
paediatric participants should be informed to the fullest extent possible about 
the study in a lan guage and in terms that they are able to understand. Where 
appropriate, paediatric participants should additionally assent to enrol in the 
study. Mature minors and adolescents should personally sign and date a 
separately designed written assent form. Altho ugh a participant's wish to 
withdraw from a study must be respected, there may be circumstances in 
therapeutic studies, for serious or life -threatening diseases in which,, in the 
opinion of the Investigator and parent(s)/ legal guardian, the welfare of a 
pediatric patient would be jeopardized by his or her failing to participate in the 
study. In this situation, continued parental/legal guardian consent should be 
sufficient'to allow participation in the study. 
(viii) For clinical trials conducted in the paediatric pdpulation, the reviewing 
ethics committee should include members who are knowledgeable about 
paediatric, ethical, clinical and psychosocial issues. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(3) Pregnant or Nursing Women.—(i) Pregnant or'nursing women should be 
includes in clinical trials o nly when the drug is intended for use by 
pregnant/nursing women or foetuses/nursing infants and where the data 
generated from women who are not pregnant or nursing, is not suitable. 
(ii) For new drugs intended for use during pregnancy, follow -up data 
(pertaining to a period appropriate for that drug) on the pregnancy, foetus and 
child will be required. Where applicable, excretion of the drug: or iits 
metabolites into human milk should be examined and the infant should be 
monitored for predicted pharmacological effects of the drug. 
1303[(4) Post Marketing Surveillance — (i) The applicant shall have a 
pharmacovigilance system in place for collecting, processing and forwarding 
the report to the licensing authority for, information on adverse dr ug reactions 
emerging from the use of the drug manufactured or marketed by the applicant in 
the country. 
(ia) The system shall be managed by qualified and trained personnel a nd the 
officer in-charge of collection and processing of data shall b e a medical officer 
or a pharmacist trained in collection and analysis of adverse drug reaction 
(ib) Subsequent to approval of the product, new drug shall be closely 
monitored for its clinical safety once it is marketed. 
(ic) The applicant shall furn ish Periodic Safety Update Reports (PSURs) in 
order to— 
(a) report all relevant new information from appropriate sources; 
(b) relate the data to patient exposure; 
(c) summarise the market authorisation status in different countries and 
any significant variations related to safety; and 
(d) indicate whether changes shall be made to product information in 
order to optimise the use of product.] 
(ii) Ordinarily all dosage forms and formulations as well as indications for 
new drugs should be covere d in one PSUR. Within the single PSUR separate 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
presentations of data for different dosage forms, indications or separate 
population need to be given. 
(iii) All relevant clinical and non -clinical safety data should cover only 
the period of the report (interval data). The PSURs shall be : submitted every six 
months for the first two years after approval of the drug is granted to the 
applicant. For subsequent two. years -the PSURs need to be submitted annually. 
Licensing authority may extend the total durati on of submission of PSURs if it 
is considered necessary in the interest of public health. PSURs due for a period 
must be submitted within 30 calendar days of the last day of the reporting 
period. However, all cases involving serious unexpected adverse reac tions must 
be reported to the licensing authority within 15 days of initial receipt of the 
information by the applicant. If marketing of the new drug is delayed by the 
applicant after obtaining approval to market, such data will have to be provided 
on the deferred basis beginning from the time the new drug is marketed. 
(iv) New studies specifically planned or conducted to examine a safety 
issue should be described in the PSURs. 
(v) A PSUR should be structured as follows:— 
(a) A title page stating: Periodic safety update report for the product; 
applicant's name, period covered by the report, date of approval of 
new drug, date of marketing of new drug and date of reporting; 
(b) Introduction; 
(c) Current worldwide market authorization status 
(d) Update of actions taken for safety reasons; 
(e) Changes to reference safety information; 
(f) Estimated patient exposure; 
(g) Presentation of individual case histories; 
(h) Studies; 
(i) Other information; 
(j) Overall safety evaluation; 
(k) Conclusion; 
(l) Appendix providing material relating to indications, dosing, 
pharmacology and other related information. 
(5) Special studies: Bioavailability/Bioequivalence studies: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(i) drugs approved elsewhere in the world and absorbed systemically, 
Bioequivalence With the reference formulation should be carried out wherever 
applicable. These studies should be conducted under the labelled conditions of 
administration. Data on the extent of systemic absorption may be required for 
formulations other than those designed for systemic absorption. 
(ii) Evaluation of the effect of food on absorption following oral 
administration should be carried out. Data from dissolution studies should also 
be submitted for all solid oral dosage forms. 
(iii) Dissolution and bioavailability data submitted with the new drug 
application must provide information that assures bioequivalence or establishes 
bioavailability and dosage correlations between the formulation(s) sought to be 
marketed and those used f or clinical trials during clinical development of the 
product. (See Items 8.1, 8.2 and 8.3 of Appendix I). 
(iv) All bioavailability and bioequivalence studies should be conducted 
according to the Guidelines for bioavailability and bioequivalence studies as 
prescribed. 
Note.—The data requirements stated in this Schedule are expected to 
provide adequate information to evaluate the efficacy, safety and therapeutic 
rationale of new drugs (as defined under rule 122 -E) prior to the permission for 
sale. Dependi ng upon the nature of new drugs and disease(s), additional 
information may be required by the Licensing Authority. The applicant shall 
certify the authenticity of the data and documents submitted in support of an 
application for new drug. The Licensing Aut hority reserves the right to reject 
any data or any document(s) if such data or contents of such documents are 
found to be of doubtful integrity. 
APPENDIX I 
DATA TO BE SUBMITTED ALONG WITH THE APPLICATION TO 
CONDUCT CLINICAL TRIALS/IMPORT/MANUFACTURE OF NEW 
DRUGS FOR MARKETING IN THE COUNTRY 
1. Introduction 
A brief description of the drug and the therapeutic class to which it belongs 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. Chemical and pharmaceutical information 
2.1. Information on active ingredients 
 Drug information (Generic name, Chemical name or INN) 
2.2 Physicochemical Data 
(a) Chemical name and structure 
Empirical formula 
Molecular weight 
(b) Physical properties 
Description 
Solubility 
Rotation 
Partition coefficient 
Dissociation constant 
2.3. Analytical Data 
Elemental analysis 
Mass spectrum 
NMR spectra 
IR spectra 
UV spectra 
Polymorphic identification 
2.4. Complete monograph specification including 
Identification 
Identity/quantification of impurities 
Enantiomeric purity 
Assay 
2.5. Validations 
Assay method 
Impurity estimation method 
Residual solvent/other volatile impurities (OVI) estimation method 
2.6. Stability studies (for details refer Appendix IX) 
Final release specification 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Reference standard characterization 
Material safety data sheet 
2.7. Data on Formulation 
Dosage form Composition 
Master manufacturing formula 
Details of the formulation (including inactive ingredients) 
In process quality control check 
Finished product specification 
Excipient compatibility study 
Validation of the analytical method 
Comparative evaluation with international brand(s) or approved Indian 
brands, if applicable 
Pack presentation 
Dissolution 
Assay 
Impurities 
Content uniformity 
pH 
Force degradation study 
Stability evaluation in market intended pack at proposed st orage 
conditions 
Packing specifications 
Process validation 
When the application is for clinical trials only, the international non -
proprietary name (INN) or generic name, drug category, dosage form and data 
supporting stability in the intended container -closure system for the duration of 
the clinical trial (information covered in Item Nos. 2.1, 2.3, 2.6, 2.7) are 
required. 
3. Animal Pharmacology (for details refer Appendix IV) 
3.1 Summary 
3.2 Specific pharmacological actions 
3.3 General pharmacological actions 
3.4 Follow-up and Supplemental Safety Pharmacology Studies 
3.5 Pharmacokinetics: absorption; distribution; metabolism; excretion 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
4. Animal Toxicology (for details refer Appendix III) 
4.1 General Aspects 
4.2 Systemic Toxicity Studies 
4.3 Male Fertility Study 
4.4 Female Reproduction and Developmental Toxicity Studies 
4.5 Local toxicity 
4.6 Allergenicity/Hypersensitivity 
4.7 Genotoxicity 
4.8 Carcinogenicity 
1304[Note.—Where the data on animal toxicity as per t he specifications of 
Appendix-III has been submitted and the same has been considered by the 
regulatory authority of the country which had earlier approved the drug, the 
animal toxicity studies shall not be required to be cond ucted in India except in 
cases where there are. specific concerns recorded in writing.] 
 5. Human/Clinical pharmacology (Phase I) 
5.1 Summary 
5.2 Specific Pharmacological effects 
5.3 General Pharmacological effects 
5.4 Pharmacokinetics, absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion 
5.5 Pharmacodynamics/early measurement of drug activity 
6. Therapeutic exploratory trials (Phase II) 
6.1 Summary 
6.2 Study report(s) as given in Appendix II 
7. Therapeutic confirmatory trials (Phase III) 
7.1 Summary 
7.2 Individual study reports with listing of sites and investigators 
8. Special studies 
8.1 Summary 
8.2 Bioavailability/Bioequivalence 
8.3 Other studies e.g. geriatrics, paediatrics, pregnant or nursing 
women 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
9. Regulatory status in other countries 
9.1. Countries where the drug is 
(a) Marketed 
(b) Approved 
(c) Approved as IND 
(d) Withdrawn, if any, with reasons 
9.2. Restrictions on use, if any, in countries where marketed/approved 
9.3 Free sale certificate or certificate of analysis, as appropriate 
10. Prescribing information 
10.1 Proposed full prescribing information 
10.2 Drafts of labels and cartons 
11. Samples and Testing Protocol/s 
11.1 Samples of pure drug substance an d finished product (an 
equivalent of 50 clinical doses, or more number of clinical doses 
 if prescribed by the Licensing Authority), with testing protocol/s, 
full impurity profile and release specifications. 
1305[12. New Chemical Entity and Global Clinical Trial: 
12.1 Assessment of risk versus benefit to the patients 
12.2 Innovation vis-a-vis existing therapeutic option 
12.3 Unmet medical need in the country.] 
Notes.—(1) All items may not be applicable to all dru gs. For explanation, 
refer text of Schedule Y. 
(2), For requirements of data Jo be submitted with application for clinical 
trials refer text of this Schedule. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
APPENDIX IA 
DATA REQUIRED TG BE SUBMITTED BY AN APPLICATION 
FOR GRANT OF PERMISSION TO IMPORT AND/OR 
MANUFACTURE A NEW DRUG ALREADY APPROVED IN THE 
COUNTRY 
1. Introduction 
A brief description of the drug and the therapeutic class 
2. Chemical and pharmaceutical information 
2.1 Chemical name, code name or number, if any; non-proprietary or 
generic name, if any, structure; physico-chemical properties 
2.2 Dosage form and its composition 
2.3 Test specifications 
(a) active ingredients 
(b) inactive ingredient 
2.4 Tests for identification of the active ingredients and method of its assay 
2.5 Outline of the method of manufacture of active ingredients 
2.6 Stability data 

3. Marketing information 
3.1 Proposed package insert/promotional literature 
3.2 Draft specimen of the label and carton 

4. Special studies conducted with approval of Licensing Authority 
4.1 Bioavailability/Bioequivalence and comparative dissolution studies for 
oral dosage forms 
4.2 Sub-acute animal toxicity studies for intravenous infusions and 
injectables. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1306[APPENDIX IB 
DATA TO BE SUBMITTED ALONG WITH APPLICATION TO 
CONDUCT CLINICAL TRIAL OR IMPORT OR MANUFACTURE OF 
A PHYTOPHARMACEUTICAL DRUG IN THE COUNTRY 
PART I 
1. Data to be submitted by the applicant: 
1.1. A brief description or summary of the phytopharmaceutical drug giving 
the botanical name of the plant (including vernacular or scriptural name, 
wherever applicable), formulation and route of administration, dosages, 
therapeutic class for Which it is indicated and the claims id be’made f or the 
phytopharmaceutical product. 
1.2. Published literature including information on plant or product or 
phytopharmaceutical drug, as a traditional medicine or as an ethno medicine and 
provide reference to books and other documents, regarding composit ion, 
process prescribed, dose or method of usage, proportion of the active 
ingredients in such traditional preparations per dose or per day's consumption 
and uses. 
1.3. Information on any contraindications, side effects mentioned in 
traditional medicine or ethno medicine literature or reports on current usage of 
the formulation. 
1.4. Published scientific reports in respect of safety and pharmacological 
studies relevant for the phytopharmaceutical drug intended to be marketed,— 
(a) where the process and usages are similar or same to the product known 
in traditional medicine or ethno medicine; and 
(b) where process or usage is different from that known in traditional 
medicine or ethno medicine. 
1.5. Information on any contraindications, side eff ects mentioned or reported 
in any of the studies, information on side effects and adverse reactions reported 
during current usage of the phytopharmaceutical in the last three years, 
wherever applicable. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1.6. Present usage of the phytopharmaceutical drug , - to establish history of 
usages, provide details of the product, manufacturer, quantum sold, extent of 
exposure on human population and number of years for which the product is 
being sold. 
2. Human or clinical pharmacology information: 
2.1. Published scientific reports in respect of pharmacological studies 
including human studies or clinical studies or epidemiological studies, relevant 
for the phytopharmaceutical drug intended to be marketed,— 
(a) where the process and usages are similar or same to the product known 
in traditional medicine or ethno medicine; and 
(b) where process or usage is different from that known in traditional 
medicine or ethno medicine. 
2.2. Pharmacodynamic information (if available). 
2.3. Monographs, if any, publi shed on the plant or product or extract or 
phytopharmaceutical. (Copies of all publications, along with english translation 
to be attached.) 
PART II 
DATA GENERATED BY APPLICANT 
3. Identification, authentication and source of plant used for extraction 
and fractionation: 
3.1. Taxonomical identity of the plant used as a source of the 
phytopharmaceutical drug giving botanical name of genus, species and family, 
followed by the authority citation (taxonomist's name who named the species), 
the variety or the cultivar (if any) needs to be mentioned. 
3.2. Morphological and anatomical description giving diagnostic features and 
a photograph of the plant or plant part for further confirmation of identity and 
authenticity. (Furnish certificate of confirmation of botanical identity by a 
qualified taxonomist). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3.3. Natural habitat and geographical distribution of the plant and also 
mention whether the part of the plant used is renewable or destructive and the 
source whether cultivated or wild. 
3.4. Season or time of collection. 
3.5. Source of the plant including its geographical location and season or time 
of collection. 
3.6. A statement indicating whether the species is any of the following, 
namely:— 
(a) determined to be endangered or threatened unde r the Endangered 
Species Act or the Convention on International Trade in Endangered 
Species (CITES) of wild Fauna and Flora; 
(b) entitled to special protection under the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 
(18 of 2003); 
(c) any known genotypic, chemotypic and ecotypic variability of species. 
3.7. A list of grower or supplier (including names and addresses) and 
information on the following items for each grower or supplier, if available or 
identified already, including information of primary processing, namely:— 
(a) harvest location; 
(b) growth conditions; 
(c) stage of plant growth at harvest; 
(d) harvesting time; 
(e) collection, washing, drying and storage conditions; 
(f) handling, garbling and transportation; 
(g) grinding, pulverising of the plant material; and 
(h) sieving for getting uniform particle size of powdered plant material. 
3.8. Quality specifications, namely:— 
(a) foreign matter; 
(b) total ash; 
(c) acid insoluble ash; 
(d) pesticide residue; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(e) heavy metal contamination; 
(f) microbial load; 
(g) chromatographic fingerprint profile with phytochemical reference 
marker; 
(h) assay for bio-active or phytochemical compounds; and 
(i) chromatographic fingerprint of a sample as per test method given under 
quality control of the phytopharmaceutical drug (photo documentation). 
3.9. An undertaking to supply specimen sample of plant duly labeled and 
photocopy of the certificate of identity confirmation issued by a qualified 
taxonomist along with drawings or photographs of the diagnostic morphological 
and histological features of the botanical raw material used for the confirmation 
of authenticity. 
4. Process for extraction and subsequent fractionation and purification: 
4.1. Quality specifications and test methods for starting material. 
4.2. Steps involved in processing. 
(a) details of solvent used, extractive values, solvent residue tests 
or limits, physico-chemical tests, microbial loads, heavy 
metal contaminants, chromatographic finger-print profile with 
phytochemical reference markers, assay for active constituents 
or characteristic markers, if active constituents are not known; 
(b) characterisation of final purified fraction; 
(c) data on bio-active constituent of final purified fraction; 
(d) information on any excipients or diluents or stabiliser or 
preservative used, if any. 
4.3. Details of packaging of the purified and characterised final product, 
storage conditions and labeling. 
5. Formulation of phytopharmaceutical drug applied for: 
5.1. Details of the composition, proportion of the final purified fraction 
with defined markers of phytopharmaceutical drug per unit dose, name and 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
proportions of all excipients, Stab ilisers and any other agent used and 
packaging materials. 
5.2. Test for identification for the phytopharmaceutical drug 
5.3. Quality specifications for active anfil inactive phytopharmaceutical 
chromatographic finger -print profile with phytoche mical reference marker 
and assay of active constituent or characteristic chemical marker. 
6. Manufacturing process of formulation: 
6.1. The outline of the method of manufacture of the dosage form/ along 
with environmental controls, in -process quality control tests and limits for 
acceptance. 
6.2. Details of all packaging materials used, packing steps and description 
of the final packs. 
6.3. Finished product's quality specifications, including tests specific for 
the dosage form, quality and chromatographic finger -print profile with 
phytochemical refer ence marker and assay for active constituent or 
characteristic marker, if active constituents are not known. 
7. Stability data: 
7.1. Stability data of the phytopharmaceutical drug described at 4 above, 
stored at room temperature at 40 +/ - 2 deg. C and humidity at 75% RH +/- 
5%RH for 0, 1, 2, 3 and 6 months. 
7.2. Stability data of the phytopharmaceutical drug in dosage form or 
formulation stored at room temperature at 40 +/ - 2 deg. C and humidity at 
75%RH +/ -5%RH for 0, 1, 2, 3 and 6 months, in the pack intended for 
marketing. 
8. Safety and pharmacological information: 
8.1. Data on safety and pharmacological studies to be provided. 
8.2. Animal toxicity and safety data: 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) 28 to 90 days repeat dose oral toxicity on two species of 
animals; 
(b) In-vitro genotoxicity data (A me's test and Chromosomal 
aberration test as per Schedule Y); 
(c) dermal toxicity tests for topical use products; 
(d) teratogenicity study (only if phyto pharmaceutical dr ug is 
intended for use during pregnancy). 
9. Human studies: - 
9.1. Clinical trials for phytopharmaceutical drugs to be conducted as per 
applicable rules and guidelines for new drugs. ; 
9.2. For all phytopharmaceutical drugs data from phase I (to determine 
maximum tolerated dose and associated toxicities) and the protocols shall be 
submitted prior to performing the studies. 
9.3. Data of results of dose finding studies performed and the protocols 
shall be submitted prior to performing the studies: Provided that in the case 
pf phytopharmaceutical drug already marketed for more than five years or 
where there is adequate published evidence regarding the safety of the 
phytopharmaceutical drug, the studies may be abbreviated, modified or 
relaxed. 
10. Confirmatory clinical trials 
10.1. Submit protocols for approval for any specific or special safety and 
efficacy study proposed specific to the phytopharmaceutical drug. 
10.2. Submit proposed protocol for approval for human clinical studies 
appropriate to generate or validate safety and ef ficacy data for the 
phytopharmaceutical dosage form or product as per applicable rules and 
guidelines. 
10.3. Submit information on how the quality of the formulation would be 
maintained during the above studies. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
11. Regulatory status: 
11.1. Status of the phytopharma ceutical drug marketed in any country 
under any category like functional food or dietary supplement or as 
traditional medicine or as an approved drug. 
12. Marketing information: 
12.1. Details of package insert or patient infor mation sheet of the 
phytopharmaceutical drug to be marketed. 
12.2. Draft of the text for label and carton. 
13. Post marketing surveillance (PMS): 
13.1. The applicant shall furnish periodic safety update reports eyery six 
months for the first two years after approval the drug is granted. 
13.2. For subsequent two years the periodic safety update reports need to 
be submitted annually. 
14. Any other relevant information: 
Any other relevant information which the apphcant considers that it will 
help in scientific evaluation of the application. 
APPENDIX II 
STRUCTURE, CONTENTS AND FORMAT FOR CLINICAL STUDY 
REPORTS 
1. Title Page.—This page should cdntain information about the title of the 
study, the protocol code, name of the investigationa l product tested, 
development phase, indication studied, a brief description of the trial design, the 
start and end date of patient accrual and the names of the sponsor and the 
participating institutes (investigators). 
2. Study Synopsis (1 to 2 pages). —A brief overview of the study from the 
protocol development to the trial closure should be given here. This section will 
only summarize the important conclusions derived from the study. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
3. Statement of compliance with the 'Guidelines for Clinical Trials on 
Pharmaceutical Products in India —GCP Guidelines' issued by the Central 
Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health, Government of India. 
4. List of Abbreviations and Definitions. 
5 Table of contents 
6. Ethics Committee. —This section should document that the study was 
conducted in accordance with the ethical principles of Declaration of Helsinki. 
A detailed description of the Ethics Committee constitution and date(s) of 
approvals of trial documents for each of the participating sites s hould be 
provided. A declaration should state that EC notifications as per Good Clinical 
Practice Guidelines issued by Central Drugs Standard Control Organization and 
Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research on Human subjects, issued by 
Indian Council of Medical Research have been followed. 
7. Study Team.—Briefly describe the administrative structure of the study 
(Investigators, site staff; sponsor/designates, Central laboratory etc.). 
8. Introduction.—A brief description of the product development rationale 
should be given here. 
9. Study objective. —A statement describing the overall purpose of the 
study and the primary and secondary objectives to be achieved should be 
mentioned here. 
10. Investigational Plan. —This section should describe t he overall trial 
design, the subject selection criteria, the treatment procedures, 
blinding/randomization techniques, if any, allowed/disallowed concomitant 
treatment, the efficacy and safety criteria assessed, the data quality assurance 
procedures and the statistical methods planned for the analysis of the data 
obtained. 
11. Trial Subjects.-—A clear accounting of all trial subjects who entered 
the study will be given here. Mention should also be made of all cases that were 
dropouts or protocol deviation s. Enumerate the patients screened, randomised, 
and prematurely discontinued. State reasons for premature discontinuation of 
therapy in each applicable case. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
12. Efficacy Evaluation. —The results of evaluation of all the efficacy 
variables will be described in this section with appropriate tabular and graphical 
representation. A brief description of the demographic characteristics of the trial 
patients should also be provided alongwith a listing of patients and observations 
excluded from efficacy analysis. 
13. Safety Evaluation.—This section should include the complete list 
13.1 All serious adverse events, whether expected or unexpected, 
and 
13.2 Unexpected adverse events whether serious or not (compiled 
from data received as per Appendix XI). 
The comparison of adverse events across study groups may be presented in 
a tabular or graphical form. This section should also give a brief narrative of all 
important events considered related to the investigational product. 
14. Discussion and Overall Conc lusion.—Discussion of the important 
conclusions derived from the trial and scope for further development. 
15. List of References 
16. Appendices.—List of Appendices to the Clinical Trial Report— 
(a) Protocol and amendments 
(b) Specimen of Case Record Form 
(c) Investigators' name(s) with contact addresses, phone, e-mail etc. 
(d) Patient data listings 
(e) List of trial participants treated with investigational product 
(f) Discontinued participants 
(g) Protocol deviations 
(h) CRFs o f cases involving death and life threatening adverse 
event cases 
(i) Publications from the trial 
(j) Important publications referenced in the study 
(k) Audit certificate, if available 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(1) Investigator's certificate that he/she has read the report and th at 
the report accurately describes the conduct and the results of 
the study. 
APPENDIX III 
ANIMAL TOXICOLOGY (NON-CLINICAL TOXICITY STUDIES) 
1. General principles.—Toxicity studies should comply with the norms of 
Good Laboratory Practice (GLP). Briefly, the se studies should be performed by 
suitably trained and qualified staff employing properly calibrated and 
standardized equipment of adequate size and capacity. Studies should be done 
as per written protocols with modifications (if any) verifiable retrospect ively. 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) should be followed for all managerial 
and laboratory tasks related to these studies. Test substances and test systems 
(in-vitro or in -vivo) should be properly characterized and standardized. All 
documents belonging to each study, including its approved protocol, raw data, 
draft report, final report, and histology slides and paraffin tissue blocks should 
be preserved for a minimum of 5 years after marketing of the drug. 
Toxicokinetic studies (generation of pharmaco kinetic data either as an 
integral component of the conduct of non-clinical toxicity studies or in specially 
designed studies) should be conducted to assess the systemic exposure achieved 
in animals and its relationship to dose level and the time course of the toxicity 
study. Other objectives of toxicokinetic studies include obtaining data to relate 
the exposure achieved in toxicity studies to toxicological findings and 
contribute to the assessment of the relevance of these findings to clinical safety, 
to support the choice of species and treatment regimen in non -clinical toxicity 
studies and to provide information which, in conjunction with the toxicity 
findings, contributes to the design of subsequent non-clinical toxicity studies. 
1.1 Systemic Toxicity Studies 
1.1.1 Single-dose Toxicity Studies: These studies (see Appendix I, Item 4.2) 
should be carried out in 2 rodent species (mice and rats) using the same route as 
intended for humans. In addition, unless the intended route of administration in 
humans is only intravenous, at least one more route should be used in one of the 
species to ensure systemic absorption of the drug. This route should depend on 
the nature of the drug. A limit of 2g/kg (or 10 times the normal dose that is 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
intended in humans, wh ichever is higher) is recommended for oral dosing. 
Animals should be observed for 14 days after the drug administration, and 
minimum lethal dose (MLD) and maximum tolerated dose (MTD) should be 
established. If possible, the target organ of toxicity should also be determined. 
Mortality should be observed for up to 7 days after parenteral administration 
and up to 14 days after oral administration. Symptoms, signs and mode of death 
should be reported, with appropriate macroscopic and microscopic findings 
where necessary. LD10 and LD50 should be reported preferably with 95 per cent 
confidence limits. If LD 50s cannot be determined, reasons for the same should 
be stated. 
The dose causing severe toxic manifestations or death should be defined in 
the case of cytotox ic anticancer agents, and the post -dosing observation period 
should be up to 14 days. Mice should first be used for determination of MTD. 
Findings should then be confirmed in rat for establishing linear relationship 
between toxicity and body surface area. In case of nonlinearity, data of the more 
sensitive species should be used to determine the Phase I starting dose. Where 
rodents are known to be poor predictors of human toxicity (e.g., antifolates), or 
where the cytotoxic drug acts by a novel mechanism of action, MTD should be 
established in non-rodent species. 
1.1.2 Repeated-dose Systemic Toxicity Studies: These studies (see Appendix I, 
Item 4.2) should be carried out in at least two mammalian species, of which one 
should be a non-rodent. Dose ranging studies should precede the 14-, 28-, 90- or 
180-day toxicity studies. Duration of the final systemic toxicity study will 
depend on the duration, therapeutic indication and scale of the proposed clinical 
trial (see Item 1.8). If a species is known to metabolize the drug in the same way 
as humans, it should be preferred for toxicity studies. 
In repeated -dose toxicity studies the drug should be administered 7 days a 
week by the route intended for clinical use. The number of animals required for 
these studies, i.e. the minimum number of animals on which data should be 
available, is shown in Item 1.9. 
Wherever applicable, a control group of animals given the vehicle alone 
should be included, and three other groups should be given graded doses of the 
drug. The hig hest dose should produce observable toxicity; the lowest dose 
should not cause observable toxicity, but should be comparable to the intended 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
therapeutic dose in humans or a multiple of it. To make allowance for the 
sensitivity of the species the intermedia te dose should cause some symptoms, 
but not gross toxicity or death, and should be placed logarithmically between 
the other two doses. 
The parameters to be monitored and recorded in long -term toxicity studies 
should include behavioural, physiological, bioc hemical and microscopic 
observations. In case of parenteral drug administration, the sites of injection 
should be subjected to gross and microscopic examination. Initial and final 
electrocardiogram and fundus examination should be carried out in the non -
rodent species. 
In the case of cytotoxic anticancer agents dosing and study design should be 
in accordance with the proposed clinical schedule in terms of days of exposure 
and number of cycles Two rodent species may be tested for initiating Phase I 
trials. A non-rodent species should be added if the drug has a novel mechanism 
of action, or if permission for Phase II, III or marketing is being sought. 
For most compounds, it is expected that single dose tissue distribution studies 
with sufficient sensitivity and specificity will provide an adequate assessment of 
tissue distribution and the potential for accumulation. Thus, repeated dose tissue 
distribution studies should not be required uniformly for all compounds and 
should only be conducted when appropriate da ta cannot be derived from other 
sources. Repeated dose studies may be appropriate under certain circumstances 
based on the data from single dose tissue distribution studies, toxicity and 
toxicokinetic studies. The studies may be most appropriate for compou nds 
which have an apparently long half life, incomplete elimination or unanticipated 
organ toxicity. 
Notes.—(i) Single Dose Toxicity Study: Each group should contain at least 5 
animals of either sex. At least four graded should be given. Animals should be 
exposed to the test substance in a single bolus or by continuous infusion or 
several doses within 24 hours. Animals should be observed for 14 days. Signs 
of intoxication, effect on body weight, gross pathological changes should be 
reported. It is desirable to include histo-pathology of grossly affected organs, if 
any. 
(ii) Dose-ranging Study: Objectives of this study include the identification of 
target organ of toxicity and establishment of MTD for subsequent studies. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(a) Rodents: Study should be perfor med in one rodent species 
(preferably rat) by the proposed clinical route of administration. At least 
four graded doses including control should be given, and each dose group 
as well as the vehicle control should consist of a minimum of 5 animals 
of each sex. Animals should be exposed to the test substance daily for 10 
consecutive days. Highest dose should be the maximum tolerated dose of 
single-dose study. Animals should be observed daily for signs of 
intoxication (general appearance, activity and behaviou r etc.), and 
periodically for the body weight and laboratory parameters. Gioss 
examination of Viscera and microscopic examination of affected organs 
should be done. 
(b) Non-rodents: One male and one female are to be taken for 
ascending phase MTD study. Dosing should start after initial recording of 
cage-side and laboratory parameters. Starting dose may be 3 to 5 times 
the extrapolated effective dose or MTD (whichever is less), and dose 
escalation in suitable steps should be done every third day after dra wing 
the samples for laboratory parameters. Dose should be lowered 
appropriately when clinical or laboratory evidence of toxicity are 
observed. Administration of test substance should then continue for 10 
days at the well -tolerated dose level following whi ch, samples for 
laboratory parameters should be taken. Sacrifice, autopsy and 
microscopic examination of affected tissues should be performed as in the 
case of rodents.. 
(iii) 14-28 Day repeated -dose toxicity studies: One rodent (6 -10/sex/group) 
and one no n-rodent (2 -3/sex/group) species are needed. Daily dosing by 
proposed clinical route at three dose levels should be done with highest dose 
having observable toxicity, mid - dose between high and low dose, and low 
dose. The doses should preferably be multipl es of the effective dose and free 
from toxicity. Observation parameters should include cage - side observations, 
body weight changes, food/water intake, blood biochemistry, haematology, and 
gross and microscopic studies of all viscera and tissues. 
(iv) 90-Day repeated-dose toxicity studies: One rodent (15 -30/sex/group) 
and one non - rodent (4 -6/sex/group) species are needed. Daily dosing by 
proposed clinical route at three graded dose levels should be done. In addition to 
the control a “ high-dose-reversal” group and its control group should be also 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
included. Parameters should include signs of intoxication (general appearance, 
activity and behaviour etc), body weight, food intake, blood biochemical 
parameters, haematological values, urine analysis, organ wei ghts, gross and 
microscopic study of viscera and tissues . Half the animals in “reversal” groups 
(treated and control) should be sacrificed after 14 days of stopping the 
treatment. The remaining animals should be sacrificed after 28 days of stopping 
the treatment or after the recovery of signs and/or clinical pathological changes 
– whichever comes later, and evaluated for the parameters used for the main 
study. 
(v) 180-Day repeated -dose toxicity studies : One rodent (15 -30/sex/group) 
and one non -rodent (4 -6/sex/group) species are needed. At least 4 groups, 
including control, should be taken. Daily dosing by proposed clinical route at 
three graded dose levels should be done. Parameters should include signs of 
intoxication, body weight, food intake, blood bioch emistry, hematology, urine 
analysis, organ weights, gross and microscopic examination of organs and 
tissues. 
1.2 Male Fertility Study: 
One rodent species (preferably rat) should be used. Dose selection 
should be done from the results of the previous 14 or 28-day toxicity study in 
rat. Three dose groups, the highest one showing minimal toxicity in systemic 
studies, and a control group should be taken. Each group should consist of 6 
adult male animals. Animals should be treated with the test substance by the 
intended route of clinical use for minimum 28 days and maximum 70 days 
before they are paired with female animals of proven fertility in a ratio of 1:2 
for mating. 
Drug treatment of the male animals should continue during pairing. 
Pairing should be contin ued till the detection of vaginal plug or 10 days, 
whichever is earlier. Females getting thus pregnant should be examined for their 
fertility index after day 13 of gestation. All the male animals should be 
sacrificed at the end of the study. Weights of eac h testis and epididymis should 
be separately recorded. Sperms from one epididymis should be examined for 
their motility and morphology. The other epididymis and both testes should be 
examined for their histology. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1.3 Female Reproduction and:Developmental Toxicity Studies: 
These studies (see Appendix I, item 4.4) need to be carried out for all drugs 
proposed to be studied or used in women of child bearing age. Segment I, II and 
III studies (see below) are to be performed in albino mice or rats, and segment II 
study should include albino rabbits also as a second test species. 
On the occasion, when the test article is not compatible with the rabbit (e.g. 
antibiotics which are effective against gram positive, anaerobic organisms and 
protozoas) the Segment II data in the mouse may be substituted. 
1.3.1 Female Fertility Study (Segment I): The study should be done in one 
rodent species (rat preferred). The drug should be administered to both 
malesand females, beginning a sufficient number of days (28 days in mal es and 
14 days in females) before mating. Drug treatment should continue during 
mating and, subsequently, during the gestation period. Three graded doses 
should be used, the highest dose (usually the MTD obtained from previous 
systemic toxicity studies) should not affect general health of the parent animals. 
At least 15 males and 15 females should be used per dose group. Control and 
the treated groups should be of similar size. The route of administration should 
be the same as intended for therapeutic use. 
Dams should be allowed to litter and their mcdication should be continued till 
the weaning of pups. Observations on body weight, food intake, clinical signs of 
intoxication, mating behaviour, progress of gestation/parturition periods, length 
of gestation, parturition, post -partem health and gross pathology (and 
histopathology of affected organs) of dams should be recorded. The pups from 
both treated and control groups should be observed for general signs of 
intoxication, sex -wise distribution in different t reatment groups, body weight, 
growth parameters, survival, gross examination, and autopsy. Histopathology of 
affected organs should be done. 
1.3.2 Teratogenicity Study (Segment II): One rodent (preferably rat) and one 
non-rodent (rabbit) species are to be used. The drug should be administered 
throughout the period of organogenesis, using three dose levels as described for 
Segment I. The highest dose should cause minimum material toxicity and the 
lowest one should be proportional to the proposed dose for cli nical use in 
humans or a multiple of it. The route of administration should be the same as 
intended for human therapeutic use. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
The control and the treated groups should consist of at least 20 pregnant rats 
(or mice) and 12 rabbits, on each dose level. All foetuses should to be subjected 
to gross examination, one of the foetuses should be examined for skeletal 
abnormalities and the other half for visceral abnormalities. Observation 
parameters should include: (Dams) signs of intoxication, effect on body weigh t, 
effect on food intake, examination of uterus, ovaries and uterine contents, 
number of corpora lutea, implantation sites, resorption (if any); and for the 
foetuses, the total number, gender, body length, weight and gross/ 
visceral/skeletal abnormalities, if any. 
1.3.3 Perinatal Study (Segment III): This study is specially recommended if 
the drug is to be given to pregnant or nursing mothers for long periods or where 
there are indications of possible adverse effects on foetal development. One 
rodent spe cies (preferably rat) is needed. Dosing at levels comparable to 
multiples of human dose should be done by the intended clinical route. At least 
4 groups (including control), each consisting of 15 dams should be used. The 
drug should be administered through out the last trimester of pregnancy (from 
day 15 of gestation) and then the dose that causes low foetal loss should be 
continued throughout lactation and weaning. Dams should then be sacrificed 
and examined as described below. 
One male and one female from each litter of F1 generation (total 15 males and 
15 females in each group) should be selected at weaning and treated with 
vehicle or test substance (at the dose levels described above) throughout their 
periods of growth to sexual maturity, pairing, gestati on, parturition and 
lactation. Mating performance and fertility of F 1 generation should thus be 
evaluated to obtain the F 2 generation whose growth parameters should be 
monitored till weaning. The criteria of evaluation should be the same as 
described earlier (3.4.1). 
Animals should be sacrificed at the end of the study and the observation 
parameters should include (Dams) body weight, food intake, general signs of 
intoxication, progress of gestation/ parturition periods and gross pathology (if 
any); and for pups, the clinical signs, sex-wise distribution in dose groups, body 
weight, growth parameters, gross examination, survival and autopsy (if needed) 
and where necessary, histopathology. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1.4 Local Toxicity 
These studies (see Appendix I, item 4.5) are requi red when the new drug is 
proposed to be used by some special route (other than oral) in humans. The drug 
should be applied to an appropriate site (e.g., skin or vaginal mucous 
membrane) to determine local effects in a suitable species. Typical study 
designs for these studies should include three dose levels and untreated and/ or 
vehicle control, preferably use of 2 species, and increasing group size with 
increase in duration of treatment. Where dosing is restricted due to anatomical 
or humane reasons, or th e drug concentration cannot be increased beyond a 
certain level due to the problems of solubility, pH or tonicity, a clear statement 
to this effect should be given. If the drug is absorbed from the site of 
application, appropriate systemic toxicity studies will also be required. 
Notes (i) Dermal toxicity study: The study should be done in rabbit and rat. 
1307[The initial toxicity study shall be carried out by non —animal alternative 
tests as given in Organisation for Economic Coo peration and Development 
Guidelines.] Test material should be applied on shaved skin covering not less 
than 10% of the total body surface area. Porous gauze dressing should be used 
to hold liquid material in place. Formulations with different concentration s (at 
least 3) of test substance, several fold higher than the clinical dosage form 
should be used. Period of application may vary from 7 to 90 days depending on 
the clinical duration of use. Where skin irritation is grossly visible in the initial 
studies, a recovery group should be included in the subsequent repeated -dose 
study. Local signs (erythema, oedema and eschar formation) as well as 
histological examination of sites of application should be used for evaluation of 
results. 
(ii) Photo-allergy or derm al photo-toxicity: It should be tested by Armstrong/ 
Harber Test in guinea pig. This test should be done if the drug or a metabolite is 
related to an agent causing photosensitivity or the nature of action suggests such 
a potential (e.g., drugs to be used i n treatment of leucoderma). Pretest in 8 
animals should screen 4 concentrations (patch application for 2 hours ±15 min.) 
with and without UV exposure (10 J/cm 2). Observations recorded at 24 and 48 
hours should be used to ascertain highest nonirritant dose. Main test should be 
performed with 10 test animals and 5 controls. Induction with the dose selected 
from pretest should use 0.3 ml/patch for 2 hour ±15 min. followed by 10 J/cm2 
of UV exposure. This should be repeated on day 0, 2,4,7,9 and 11 of the test. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Animals should be challenged with the same concentration of test substance 
between day 20 to 24 of the test with a similar 2 -hour application followed by 
exposure to 10 J/cm 2 of UV light. Examination and grading of erythema and 
oedema formation at the cha llenge sites should be done 24 and 48 hours after 
the challenge. A positive control like musk ambrett or psoralin should be used. 
(iii) Vaginal Toxicity Test : Study is to be done in rabbit or dog. Test 
substance should be applied topically (vaginal mucosa) in the form of pessary, 
cream or ointment. Six to ten animals per dose group should be taken. Higher 
concentrations or several daily applications of test substance should be done to 
achieve multiples of daily human dose. The minimum duration of drug 
treatment is 7 days (more according to clinical use), subject to a maximum of 30 
days. Observation parameters should include swelling, closure of introitus and 
histopathology of vaginal wall. 
(iv) Rectal Tolerance Test : For all preparations meant for rectal adm inistration 
this test may be performed in rabbits or dogs. Six to ten animals per dose group 
should be taken. Formulation in volume comparable to human dose (or the 
maximum possible volume) should be applied once or several times daily, per 
rectally, to ac hieve administration of multiples of daily human dose. The 
minimum duration of application is 7 days (more according to clinical use), 
subject to a maximum of 30 days. Size of suppositories may be smaller, but the 
drug content should be several fold higher than the proposed human dose. 
Observation parameters should include clinical signs (sliding on backside), 
signs of pain, blood and/or mucus in faeces, condition of anal region/sphincter, 
gross and (if required) histological examination of rectal mucosa. 
(v) Parenteral Drugs: For products meant for intravenous or intramuscular or 
subcutaneous or intradermal injection the sites of injection in systemic toxicity 
studies should be specially examined grossly and microscopically. If needed, 
reversibility of adverse effects may be determined on a case to case basis. 
(vi) Ocular toxicity studies (for products meant for ocular instillation): 
These studies should be carried out in two species, one of which should be the 
albino rabbit which has a sufficiently large c onjunctival sac. Direct delivery of 
drug onto the cornea in case of animals having small conjunctival sacs should 
be ensured. Liquids, ointments, gels or soft contact lenses (saturated with drug) 
should be used. Initial single dose application should be do ne to decide the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
exposure concentrations for repeated -dose studies and the need to include a 
recovery group. 1308[Such initial toxicity studies shall be carried out by non -
animal alternative tests as given in Organisation for Ec onomic Cooperation and 
Development Guidelines]. Duration of the final study will depend on the 
proposed length of human exposure subject to a maximum of 90 days. At least 
two different concentrations exceeding the human dose should be used for 
demonstrating the margin of safety. In acute studies, one eye should be used for 
drug administration and the other kept as control. A separate control group 
should be included in repeated-dose studies. 
Slit-lamp examination should be done to detect the changes in corn ea, iris 
and aqueous humor. Fluorescent dyes (sodium fluorescein, 0.25 to 1.0%) should 
be used for detecting the defects in surface epithelium of cornea and 
conjunctiva. Changes in intra -ocular tension should be monitored by a 
tonometer. Histological exami nation of eyes should be done at the end of the 
study after fixation in Davidson‘s or Zenker‘s fluid. 
(vii) Inhalation toxicity studies: The studies are to be undertaken in one 
rodent and one non-rodent species using the formulation that is to be eventuall y 
proposed to be marketed. Acute, subacute and chronic toxicity studies should be 
performed according to the intended duration of human exposure. Standard 
systemic toxicity study designs (described above) should be used. Gases and 
vapours should be given i n whole body exposure chambers; aerosols are to be 
given by nose-only method. Exposure time and concentrations of test substance 
(limit dose of 5mg/l) should be adjusted to ensure exposure at levels comparable 
to multiples of intended human exposure. Three dose groups and a control (plus 
vehicle control, if needed) are required. Duration of exposure may vary subject 
to a maximum of 6 hours per day and five days a week. Food and water should 
be withdrawn during the period of exposure to test substance. 
Temperature, humidity and flow rate of exposure chamber should be 
recorded and reported. Evidence of exposure with test substance of particle size 
of 4 micron (especially for aerosols) with not less that 25% being 1 micron 
should be provided. Effects on respir atory rate, findings of bronchial lavage 
fluid examination, histological examination of respiratory passages and lung 
tissue should be included along with the regular parameters of systemic toxicity 
studies or assessment of margin of safety. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1.5 Allergenicity/Hypersensitivity 
Standard tests include guinea pig maximization test (GPMT) and local lymph 
node assay (LLNA) in mouse. Any one of the two may be done. 
Notes (i) Guinea Pig Maximization Test : The test is to be performed in two 
steps; first, determination of maximum nonirritant and minimum irritant doses, 
and second, the main test. The initial study will also have two components. To 
determine the intradermal induction dose, 4 dose levels should be tested by the 
same route in a batch of 4 male and 4 femal e animals (2 of each sex should be 
given Freund‘s adjuvant). The minimum irritant dose should be used for 
induction. Similarly, a topical minimum irritant dose should be determined for 
challenge. This should be established in 2 males and 2 females. A minim um of 
6 male and 6 female animals per group should be used in the main study. One 
test and one control group should be used. It is preferable to have one more 
positive control group. Intradermal induction (day 1) coupled with topical 
challenge (day 21) sho uld be done. If there is no response, re -challenge should 
be done 7 -30 days after the primary challenge. Erythema and oedema 
(individual animal scores as well as maximization grading) should be used as 
evaluation criteria. 
(ii) Local Lymph Node Assay : Mice used in this test should be of the same 
sex, either only males or only females. Drug treatment is to be given on ear 
skin. Three graded doses, the highest being maximum nonirritant dose plus 
vehicle control should be used. A minimum of 6 mice per group should be used. 
Test material should be applied on ear skin on three consecutive days and on 
day 5, the draining auricular lymph nodes should be dissected out 5 hours after 
i.v. H -thymidine or bromo -deoxy-uridine (BrdU). Increase in H -thymidine or 
BrdU incorporation should be used as the criterion for evaluation of results. 
1.6 Genotoxicity 
Genotoxic compounds, in the absence of other data, shall be presumed to be 
trans-species carcinogens, implying a hazard to humans. Such compounds need 
not be subjected to long-term carcinogenicity studies. However, if such a drug is 
intended to be administered for chronic illnesses or otherwise over a long period 
of time - a chronic toxicity study (up to one year) may be necessary to detect 
early tumorigenic effects. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Genotoxicity tests are in vitro and in vivo tests conducted to detect 
compounds which induce genetic damage directly or indirectly. These tests 
should enable a hazard identification with respect to damage to DNA and its 
fixation. 
The following standard test battery is generally expected to be conducted: 
(i) A test for gene mutation in bacteria. 
(ii) An in-vitro test with cytogenetic evaluation of chromosomal damage 
with mammalian cells or an in vitro mouse lymphoma tic assay. 
(iii) An in-vivo test for chromosomal damage using rodent hematopoietic 
cells. Other genotoxicity tests e.g. tests for measurement of DNA adducts, 
DNA strand breaks, DNA repair or recombination serve as options in 
addition to the standard battery for further investigation of genotoxi city 
test results obtained in the standard battery. Only under extreme conditions 
in which one or more tests comprising the standard battery cannot be 
employed for technical reasons, alternative validated tests can serve as 
substitutes provided sufficient scientific justification should be provided to 
support the argument that a given standard battery test is not appropriate. 
Both in -vitro and in -vivo studies should be done. In -vitro studies should 
include Ames' Salmonella Assay and Chromosomal Aberrations (CA) in 
cultured cells. In -vivo studies should include Micronucleus Assay (MNA) 
or CA in rodent bone marrow. Data analysis of CA should include analysis 
of 'gaps'. 
Cytotoxic Anticancer Agents: Genotoxicity data are not required before Phase 
I and II trial s. But these studies should be completed before applying for Phase 
III trials. 
Notes.—Ames' Test (Reverse Mutation Assay in Salmonella): S. 
typhimurium tester strains such as TA98, TA100, TA102, TA1535, TA97 or 
Escherichia coli WP2 uvrA or Escherichia coli WP2 uvrA (pKM101) should be 
used. 
(i) In-vitro exposure (with and without metabolic activation, S9 mix) should be 
done at a minimum of 5 log dose levels. "Solvent" and "positive" control should 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
be used. Positive control may include 9 -amino-acridine, 2-nitrofluorine, sodium 
azide and mitomycin C, respectively, in the tester strains mentioned above. 
Each set should consist of at least three replicates. A 2.5 fold (or more) increase 
in number of revertants in comparison to spontaneous revertants would be 
considered positive. 
(ii) In-vitro Cytogenetic Assay: The desired level of toxicity for in -vitro 
cytogenetic tests using cell lines should be greater than 50% reduction in cell 
number or culture confluency. For lymphocyte cultures, an inhibition of mitotic 
index by greater than 50% is considered sufficient. It should be performed in 
CHO cells or on human lymphocyte in culture. In -vitro exposure (with and 
without metabolic activation, S9 mix) should be done using a minimum of 3 log 
doses. "Solvent" and "posit ive" control should be included. A positive control 
like Cyclophosphamide with metabolic activation and Mitomycin C for without 
metabolic activation should be used to give a reproducible and detectable 
increase clastogenic effect over the background which demonstrates the 
sensitivity of the test system. Each set should consist of at least three replicates. 
Increased number of aberrations in meta Phase chromosomes should be used as 
the criteria for evaluation. 
(iii) In-vivo Micronucleus Assay: One rodent species (preferably mouse) is 
needed. Route of administration of test substance should be the same as 
intended for humans. Five animals per sex per dose groups should be used. At 
least three dose levels, plus "solvent" and "positive" control should be test ed. A 
positive control like mitomycin C or cyclophosphamide should be used. Dosing 
should be done on day 1 and 2 of study followed by sacrifice of animals 6 hours 
after the last injection. Bone marrow from both the femora should be taken out, 
flushed with fetal bovine serum (20 min.), pelletted and smeared on glass slides. 
Giemsa-MayGruenwald staining should be done and increased number of 
micronuclei in polychromatic erythrocytes (minimum 1000) should be used as 
the evaluation criteria. 
(iv) In-vivo Cyt ogenetic Assay: One rodent species (preferably rat) is to be 
used. Route of administration of test substance should be the same as intended 
for humans. Five animals/sex/dose groups should be used. At least three dose 
levels, plus "solvent' and "Positive" c ontrol should be tested. Positive control 
may include cyclophosphamide. Dosing should be done on day I followed by 
intra-peritoneal colchicine administration at 22 hours. Animals should be 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
sacrificed 2 hours after colchicine administration. Bone marrow fro m both the 
femora should be taken out, flushed with hypotonic saline (20 min.), pelletted 
and resuspended in Carnoy's fluid. Once again the cells should be pelletted and 
dropped on clean glass slides with a Pasteur pipette. Giemsa staining should be 
done a nd increased number of aberrations in metaphase chromosomes 
(minimum 100) should be used as the evaluation criteria. 
1.7 Carcinogenicity (See Appendix 1, Item 4.8) 
Carcinogenicity studies should be performed for all drugs that are expected to 
be clinically used for more than 6 months as well as for drugs used frequently in 
an intermittent manner in the treatment of chronic or recurrent conditions. 
Carcinogenicity studies are also to be performed for drugs if there is concern 
about their carcinogenic potenti al emanating from previous demonstration of 
carcinogenic potential in the product class that is considered relevant to humans 
or where structure-activity relationship suggests carcinogenic risk or when there 
is evidence of preneoplastic lesions in repeated dose toxicity studies or when 
long-term tissue retention of parent compound or metabolite(s) results in local 
tissue reactions or other pathophysiological responses. For pharmaceuticals 
developed to treat certain serious diseases, Licensing Authority may allow 
carcinogenicity testing to be conducted after marketing permission has been 
granted. 
In instances where the life -expectancy in the indicated population is short 
(i.e., less than 2 -3 years) - no long -term carcinogenicity studies may be 
required. In cases where the therapeutic agent for cancer is generally successful 
and life is significantly prolonged there may be later concerns regarding 
secondary cancers. When such drugs are intended for adjuvant therapy in 
tumour free patients or for prolonged use i n non -cancer indications, 
carcinogenicity studies may be/are needed. Completed rodent carcinogenicity 
studies are not needed in advance of the conduct of large scale clinical trials, 
unless there is special concern for the patient population. 
Carcinogenicity studies should be done in a rodent species (preferably rat). 
Mouse may be employed only with proper scientific justification. The selected 
strain of animals should not have a very high or very low incidence of 
spontaneous tumors. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
At least three dose lev els should be used. The highest dose should be sub -
lethal, and it should not reduce the life span of animals by more than 10% of 
expected normal. The lowest dose should be comparable to the intended human 
therapeutic dose or a multiple of it, e.g. 2.5x; to make allowance for the 
sensitivity of the species. The intermediate dose is to be placed logarithmically 
between the other two doses. An untreated control and (if indicated) a vehicle 
control group should be included. The drug should be administered 7 day s a 
week for a fraction of the life span comparable to the fraction of human life 
span over which the drug is likely to be used therapeutically. Generally, the 
period of dosing should be 24 months for rats and 18 months for mice. 
Observations should includ e macroscopic changes observed at autopsy and 
detailed histopathology of organs and tissues. Additional tests for 
carcinogenicity (short-term bioassays, neonatal mouse assay or tests employing 
transgenic animals) may also be done depending on their applica bility on a case 
to case basis. 
Note.—Each dose group and concurrent control group not intended to be 
sacrificed early should contain at least 50 animals of each sex. A high dose 
satellite group for evaluation of pathology other than neoplasia should conta in 
20 animals of each sex while the satellite control group should contain 10 
animals of each sex. Observation parameters should include signs of 
intoxication, effect on body weight, food intake, clinical chemistry parameters, 
hematology parameters, urine analysis, organ weights, gross pathology and 
detailed histopathology. Comprehensive descriptions of benign and malignant 
tumour development, time of their detection, site, dimensions, histological 
typing etc. should be given. 
1.8 Animal toxicity requiremen ts for clinical trials and marketing of a new 
drug. 
Systemic Toxicity Studies 
Route of 
administration 
Duration of proposed 
human administration 
Human phase(s) for which 
study is proposed to be 
conducted 
Long-term toxicity 
requirements 
1309[Oral, or parentral 
or transdermal 
Single dose or several 
doses in one day, Upto 1 
wk 
I, II, III 2 sp, 2 wks 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
>1 wk but upto 2 wks I, II, III 2 sp; 2 wks 
Upto 2 wks Marketing permission 2 sp; 4 wks 
>2 wks but upto 4 wks 
I, II, III 2 sp; equal to duration 
of human exposure 
Marketing permission 2 sp; 12 wks 

> 4 wks but upto 12 wks 
I, II, III 2 sp; equal to duration 
of human exposure 
Marketing permission 2 sp; 24 wks 
> 12 wks but upto 24 wks 
I, II, III 2 sp; equal to duration 
of human exposure 
Marketing permission 2 sp; Rodent 24 wks, 
non-rodent 36 wks 
> 24 wks 
I, II, III 2 sp; Rodent 24 wks, 
non-rodent 36 wks 
Marketing permission 2 sp; Rodent 24 wks, 
non-rodent 36 wks] 
Inhalation (general 
Anaesthetics, 
aerosols) 
Up to 2 wk I, II, III 2 sp; I mo (Exposure 
time 3h/d, 5d/wk) 
 Up to 4 wk I, II, III 2 sp; 12 wk (Exposure 
time 6h/d, 5d/wk) 
 > 14 wk I, II, III 2 sp; 24 wk (Exposure 
time 6h/d, 5d/wk) 
Local Toxicity 
Studies Dermal Up to 2 wk I, II 1 sp; 4 wk 
 III 2 sp; 4 wk 
 > 2 wk I, II, III 2 sp: 12 wk 
Ocular or Otic or 
Nasal Up to 2 wk I, II 1 sp; 4 wk 
 III 2 sp; 4 wk 
 > 2 wk I, II, III 2 sp: 12 wk 
Vaginal or Rectal Up to 2 wk I, II 1 sp; 4 wk 
 III 2 sp. 4 wk 
 > 2 wk I, II, III 2 sp; 12 wk 

Special Toxicity Studies 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Male Fertility Study: 
 1310[Phase III in male volunteers/patients] 
Female Reproduction and Developmental Toxicity Studies: 
 Segment II studies in 2 species; Phase II, III involving female patients of 
child-bearing age. 
 Segment I study; Phase III involving female patients of child-bearing age. 
 Segment III study; Phase III for drugs to be given to pregnant or nursing 
mothers for long periods or where there are indications of possible 
adverse effects on foetal development. 
Allergenicity / Hypersensitivity: Phase I, II, III - When there is a cause of 
concern or for parenteral drugs (including dermal application) 
Photo-allergy or Dermal Photo-toxicity: 
• Phase I, II, I II - If the drug or a metabolite is related to an agent causi ng 
photosensitivity or the nature of action suggests such a potential. 
Genotoxicity: 
 In-vitro studies - Phase I 
 Both in-vitro and in-vivo - Phase II, III 
Arcinogenicity: 
 Phase III - When there is a cause for concern, or when the drug is to be 
used for more than 6 months. 
Abbreviations: sp -species; mo -month; wk -week; d -day; h -hour, I, II, III - 
Phases of clinical trial. 
Note.—1. Animal toxicity data generated in other countries may be accepted 
and may not be asked to be repeated/duplicated in India on a case to case basis 
depending upon the quality of data and the credentials of the laboratory(ies) 
where such data has been generated. 
2. Requirements for fixed dose combinations are given in Appendix VI. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1.9 Number of animals required for repeated-dose toxicity studies 
Group 
14-28 days 84-182 days 
Rodent (Rat) Non-rodent (Dog 
or Monkey) Rodent (Rat) 
Non-rodent 
(Dog or 
Monkey) 
M F M F M F M F 
Control 6-10 6-10 2-3 2-3 15-30 15-30 4-6 4-6 
Low dose 6-10 6-10 2-3 2-3 15-30 15-30 4-6 4-6 
Intermediate dose 6-10 6-10 2-3 2-3 15-30 15-30 4-6 4-6 
High dose 6-10 6-10 2-3 2-3 15-30 15-30 4-6 4-6 

2.0 Laboratory parameters to be included in toxicity studies 
Haematological parameters 
• Haemoglobin • Total RBC Count • Haematocrit • Reticulocyte Count 
• Total WBC Count • Differential WBC • Platelet Count • Terminal Bone Marrow 
 Count Examination 
• ESR (Non-rodents only) • General Blood Picture: A special mention of abnormal and immature 
cells should be made 
• Coagulation Parameters (Non-rodents only): Bleeding Time, Coagulation Time, Prothrombin Time 
Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time. 

Urinalysis Parameters 
• Colour • Appearance • Specific Gravity • 24-hour urinary output 
• Reaction (pH) • Albumin • Sugar • Acetone 
• Bile pigments • Urobilinogen • Occult Blood 

Blood Biochemical Parameters 
•Glucose • Cholesterol • Triglycerides • HDL Cholesterol (Non-rodents only) 
•LDL Cholesterol (Non-rodents only) • Bilirubin • SGPT(ALT) • SGOT (AST) 
•Alkaline Phosphatase • GGT (Non-rodents (ALP) only) • Blood Urea Nitrogen • Creatinine 
• Total Proteins • Albumin • Globulin (Calculated values) • Sodium 
• Potassium • Phosphorus • Calcium 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Grass and Microscopic Pathology 
• Brain*: 
Cerebrum, 
Cerebellum, 
Midbrain 
• (Spinal Cord) • Eye • (Middle Ear) 
• Thyroid • (Parathyroid) • Spleen* • Thymus 
• Adrenal* • (Pancreas) • (Trachea) • Lung* 
• Heart* • Aorta • Oesophagus • Stomach 
• Duodenum • Jejunum • Terminal ileum • Colon 
• (Rectum) • Liver* • Kidney* • Urinary bladder 
• Epididymis • Testis* • Ovary • Uterus* 
• Skin • Mammary gland • Mesenteric 
lymph node • Skeletal muscle 

* Organs marked with an asterisk should be weighed. 
( ) Organs listed in parenthesis should be examined if indicated by the nature of 
the drug or observed effects. 
Non-clinical toxicity testing and safety evaluation data of an IND needed for 
the conduct of different phases of clinical trials. 
Note.—Refer Appendix III (Points 1.1 through 1.7 and tables 1.8 and 1.9) 
for essential features of study designs of the no n-clinical toxicity studies listed 
below. 
For Phase I Clinical Trials Systemic Toxicity studies 
(i) Single dose toxicity studies. 
(ii) Dose Ranging Studies. 
(iii) Repeat-dose systemic toxicity studies of appropriate duration to support 
the duration of proposed human exposure. 
Male fertility study 
In-vitro genotoxicity tests— 
Relevant local toxicity studies with proposed route of clinical application 
(duration depending on proposed length of clinical exposure). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Allergenicity/Hypersensitivity tests (when there is a cause for concern or for 
parenteral drugs, including dermal application). 
Photo-allergy or dermal photo -toxicity test (if the drug or a metabolite is 
related to an agent causing photosensitivity or the nature of action suggests such 
a potential). 
For Phase II Clinical Trials 
Provide a summary of all the non -clinical safety data (listed above) already 
submitted while obtaining the permissions for Phase I trial, with appropriate 
references. 
In case of an application for directly starting a Pha se II trial - complete 
details of the non -clinical safety data needed for obtaining the permission for 
Phase I trial, as per the list provided above must be submitted. 
Repeat-dose systemic toxicity studies of appropriate duration to support the 
duration of proposed human exposure. 
In-vivo genotoxicity tests— 
Segment II reproductive/developmental toxicity study (if female patients of 
child bearing age are going to be involved). 
For Phase III Clinical Trials 
Provide a summary of all the non -clinical safety da ta (listed above) already 
submitted while obtaining the permission for Phase I and II trials, with 
appropriate references. 
In case of an application for directly initiating a Phase III trial - complete 
details of the non -clinical safety data needed for obt aining the permissions for 
Phase I and Phase II trials, as per the list provided above must be provided. 
Repeat-dose systemic toxicity studies of appropriate duration to support the 
duration of proposed human exposure. 
Reproductive/developmental toxicity studies 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Segment I (if female patients of child bearing age are going to be involved), 
and Segment III (for drugs to be given to pregnant or nursing mothers or where 
there are indications of possible adverse effects on foetal development). 
Carcinogenicity studies (when there is a cause for concern or when the drug 
is to be used for more than 6 months). 
For Phase IV Clinical Trials 
Provide a summary of all the non -clinical safety data (listed above) already 
submitted while obtaining the permissions for Phase I , II and III trials, with 
appropriate references. 
In case an application is made for initiating the Phase IV trial, complete 
details of the non -clinical safety data needed for obtaining the permissions for 
Phase I, II and III trials, as per the list provided above must be submitted. 
Application of Good Laboratory Practices (GLP)— 
The animal studies be conducted in an accredited laboratory. Where the 
safety pharmacology studies are part of toxicology studies, these studies should 
also be conducted in an accredited laboratory. 
APPENDIX IV 
ANIMAL PHARMACOLOGY 
1. General principles 
Specific and general pharmacological studies should be conducted to support 
use of therapeutics in humans. In the early stages of drug development enough 
information may not be avail able to rationally select study design for safety 
assessment. In such a situation, a general approach to safety pharmacology 
studies can be applied. Safety pharmacology studies are studies that investigate 
potential undesirable pharmacodynamic effects of a substance on physiological 
functions in relation to exposure within the therapeutic range or above. 
1.1 Specific Pharmacological Actions 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Specific pharmacological actions are those which demonstrate the therapeutic 
potential for humans. 
The specific studies that should be conducted and their design will be different 
based on the individual properties and intended uses of investigational drug. 
Scientifically validated methods should be used. The use of new technologies 
and methodologies in accordance with so und scientific principles should be 
preferred. 
1.2 General Pharmacological Actions 
1.2.1 Essential Safety Pharmacology 
Safety pharmacology studies need to be conducted to investigate the 
potential undesirable pharmacodynamic effects of a substance on physi ological 
functions in relation to exposure within the therapeutic range and above. These 
studies should be designed to identify undesirable pharmacodynamic properties 
of a substance that may have relevance to its human safety; to evaluate adverse 
pharmacodynamic and/or pathophysiological effects observed in toxicology 
and/or clinical studies; and to investigate the mechanism of the adverse 
pharmacodynamic effects observed and/or suspected. 
The aim of the essential safety pharmacology is to study the effects of the 
test drug on vital functions. Vital organ systems such as cardiovascular, 
respiratory and central nervous systems should be studied. Essential safety 
pharmacology studies may be excluded or supplemented based on scientific 
rationale. Also, the excl usion of certain test(s) or exploration(s) of certain 
organs, systems or functions should be scientifically justified. 
1.2.1.1 Cardiovascular System 
Effects of the investigational drug should be studied on blood pressure, heart 
rate and the electrocardi ogram. If possible in -vitro, in -vivo and/or ex -vivo 
methods including electrophysiology should also be considered. 
1.2.1.2 Central Nervous System 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Effects of the investigational drug should be studied on motor activity, 
behavioural changes, coordination, sensory and motor reflex responses and 
body temperature. 
1.2.1.3 Respiratory System 
Effects of the investigational drug on respiratory rate and other functions 
such as tidal volume and haemoglobin oxygen saturation should be studied. 
1.3 Follow-up and Supplemental Safety Pharmacology Studies 
In addition to the essential safety pharmacological studies, additional 
supplemental and follow -up safety pharmacology studies may need to be 
conducted as appropriate. These depend on the pharmacological properties or 
chemical class of the test substance, and the data generated from safety 
pharmacology studies, clinical trials, pharmacovigilance, experimental in -vitro 
or in-vivo studies, or from literature reports. 
1.3.1 Follow-up Studies for Essential Safety Pharmacology 
Follow-up studies provide additional information or a better understanding 
than that provided by the essential safety pharmacology. 
1.3.1.1 Cardiovascular System 
These include ventricular contractility, vascular resistance and the 
effects of chemical mediators, their agonists and antagonists on the 
cardiovascular system. 
1.3.1.2 Central Nervous System 
These include behavioural studies, learning and memory, 
electrophysiology studies, neurochemistry and ligand binding 
studies. 
1.3.1.3 Respiratory System 
These include airway resistance, compliance, pulmonary arterial 
pressure, blood gases and blood pH. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1.3.2 Supplemental Safety Pharmacology Studies 
These studies are required to investigate the possible adverse 
pharmacological effects that are not as sessed in the essential safety 
pharmacological studies and are a cause for concern. 
1.3.2.1 Urinary System 
These include urine volume, specific gravity, osmolality, pH, 
proteins, cytology and blood urea nitrogen, creatinine and plasma 
proteins estimation. 
1.3.2.2 Autonomic Nervous System 
These include binding to receptors relevant for the autonomic 
nervous system, and functional response to agonist or antagonist 
responses in -vivo or in -vitro, and effects of direct stimulation of 
autonomic nerves and their effects on cardiovascular responses. 
1.3.2.3 Gastrointestinal System 
These include studies on gastric secretion, gastric pH 
measurement, gastric mucosal examination, bile secretion, gastric 
emptying time in-vivo and ileocaecal contraction in-vitro. 
1.3.2.4 Other Organ Systems 
Effects of the investigational drug on organ systems not 
investigated elsewhere should be assessed when there is a cause for 
concern. For example dependency potential, skeletal muscle, 
immune and endocrine functions may be investigated. 
1.4 Conditions under which Safety Pharmacology Studies are not necessary 
Safety pharmacology studies are usually not required for locally applied 
agents e.g. dermal or ocular, in cases when the pharmacology of the 
investigational drug is we ll known, and/or when systemic absorption from the 
site of application is low. Safety pharmacology testing is also not necessary, in 
the case of a new derivative having similar pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1.5 Timing of Safety Pharmacology Stu dies in relation to Clinical 
Development 
1.5.1 Prior to First Administration in Humans 
The effects of an investigational drug on the vital functions listed in the 
essential safety pharmacology should be studied prior to first 
administration in humans. A ny follow -up or supplemental studies 
identified, should be conducted if necessary, based on a cause for 
concern. 
1.5.2 During Clinical Development 
Additional investigations may be warranted to clarify observed or 
suspected adverse effects in animals and humans during clinical 
development. 
1.5.3 Before applying for marketing approval 
Follow-up and supplemental safety pharmacology studies should be 
assessed prior to approval unless not required, in which case this should 
be justified. Available informat ion from toxicology studies addressing 
safety pharmacology endpoints or information from clinical studies can 
replace such studies. 
1.6 Application of Good Laboratory Practices (GLP) 
The animal studies be conducted in an accredited laboratory. Where the 
safety pharmacology studies are part of toxicology studies, these studies should 
also be conducted in an accredited laboratory. 
APPENDIX V 
INFORMED CONSENT 
1. Checklist for study subject's informed consent documents— 
1.1 Essential Elements: 
1. Statement that the study involves research and explanation of the 
purpose of the research. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. Expected duration of the subject's participation. 
3. Description of the procedures to be followed, including all invasive 
procedures. 
4. Description of any reasonably foreseeable risks or discomforts to the 
subject. 
5. Description of any benefits to the subject or others reasonably 
expected from research. If no benefit is expected subject should be 
made aware of this. 
6. Disclosure of specific appropriate alte rnative procedures or therapies 
available to the subject. 
7. Statement describing the extent to which confidentiality of records 
identifying the subject will be maintained and who will have access 
to subject's medical records. 
8. Trial treatment sche dule(s) and the probability for random 
assignment to each treatment (for randomized trials). 
1311[(9) Statement describing the financial compensation and medical 
management as under: 
1312[(a) In case of an injury occurring to the subject during the clinical 
trial, free medical management shall be given as long as required 
or till such time it is established that the injury is not related to 
the clinical trial, whichever is earlier. 
(b) In the event of a trial related injury or death, the Sponsor or his 
representative, whosoever has obtained permission from the 
Licensing Authority for conduct of the clinical trial, shall 
provide financial compensation for the injury or death. 
10. An explanation about whom to contact for trial related queries, rights 
of subjects and in the event of any injury. 
11. The anticipated prorated payment, if any, to the subject for 
participating in the trial. 
12. Subject's responsibilities on participation in the trial. 
13. Statement that participation is voluntary, that the subject can 
withdraw from the study at any time and that refusal to participate 
will not involve any penalty or loss of benefits to which the subject 
is otherwise entitled. 
1313[14. Statement that there is a possibility of failure of investigational product 
to provide intended therapeutic effect. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1313[15. Statement that in the case of placebo controlled trial, the placebo 
administered to the subjects shall not have any therapeutic effect. 
1313[16. Any other pertinent information. 
1.2 Additional elements, which may be required: 
(a) Statement of foreseeable circumstances under which the subject's 
participation may be terminated by the Investigator without the 
subject's consent. 
(b) Additional costs to the subject that may result from participation in 
the study. 
(c) The consequences of a subject's decision to withdraw from the 
research and procedures for orderly termination of participation by 
subject. 
(d) Statement that the subject or subject's representative will be notified 
in a timely manner if significant new findings develop during the 
course of the research which may affect the subject's willingness to 
continue participation will be provided. 
(e) A statement that the particular treatment or procedure may involve 
risks to the subject (or to the embryo or foetus, if the subject is or 
may become pregnant), which are currently unforeseeable. 
(f) Approximate number of subjects enrolled in the study. 
2. Format of informed consent form for subjects participating in a clinical 
trial— 
Informed Consent form to participate in a clinical trial Study Title: 
Study Number: 
Subject's Initials:..............................................Subject's Name:....................... 
Date of Birth/Age:.................... 
1314[Address of the Subject............. 
Qualification............. 
Occupation: Student/Self-Employed/Service/Housewife/Others (Please tick as 
appropriate) 
Annual Income of the subject............................... 
Name and address of the nominee(s) and his relation to the subject.............(for 
the purpose of compensation in case of trial related death).] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Please initial box 
(Subject) 

(i) I confirm that I have read and understood the information sheet 
dated.......... for the above study and have had the opportunity to ask 
questions 
[ ] 
(ii) I understand that my participation in the study is voluntary and that 
I am free to withdraw at any time, without giving any reason, 
without my medical care or legal rights being affected 
[ ] 
(iii) I understand that the sponsor of the clinical trial, others working on 
the sponsor's behalf, the Ethics Committee and the regulatory 
authorities will not need my permission to look at my health 
records both in respect of the current study and any further research 
that may be conducted in relation to it, even if I withdraw from the 
trial. I agree to this access. 

However, I understand that my identity will not be revealed 
in any information released to third parties or published. 
[ ] 
(iv) I agree not to restrict the use of any data or results that arise from 
this study provided such a use is only for scientific purpose(s). 
[ ] 
(v) I agree to take part in the above study. [ ] 

Signature (or Thumb impression) of the Subject/Legally Acceptable 
Representative: 
Date:...../.... ../....... 
Signatory's Name:____________________________ 
Signature of the Investigator:__________________________ 
Date:...../.... ../....... 
Study Investigator's Name:________________________ 
Signature of the Witness........................................................... 
Date:...../.... ../....... 
Name of the Witness:________________________________ 

1315[(Copy of the Patient Information Sheet and duly filled Informed Consent 
Form shall be handed over to the subject or his/her attendant).] 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
APPENDIX VI 
FIXED DOSE COMBINATIONS (FDCs) 
Fixed Dose Combinations refer to products containing one or more active 
ingredients used for a particular indication(s). FDCs can be divided into the 
following groups and data required for approval for marketing is described 
below: 
(a) The first group of FDCs includes those in which one or more of the active 
ingredients is a new drug. For such FDCs to be approved for marketing 
data to be submitted will be similar to data required for any new drug 
(including clinical trials) [See Rule 122E, item (a)]. 
(b) (i) The second group FDCs includes those in which active ingredients 
already approved/ marketed individually are combined for the first time, 
for a particular claim and where the ingredients are likely to have 
significant interaction of a pharmacodynamic or pharmacokinetic nature 
[See Rule 122-E, item (c)]. If clinical trials have been carried out with the 
FDC in other countries, reports of such trials should be submitted. If the 
FDC is marketed abroad, the regulatory status in other countries should be 
stated (See Appendix 1, Item 9). 
(ii) For marketing permission, appropriate chemical and pharmaceutical 
data will be submitted. In case such a combination is not marketed 
anywhere in the world but these drugs are already in use concomitantly 
(not as an FDC but individually) for the said claim, marketing permission 
may be granted based on chemical and pharmaceutical data. Data showing 
the stability of the proposed dosage form will also have to be submitted. 
(iii) For any other such FDCs, clinical trials may be required. For 
obtaining permission to carry out clinical trials with such FDCs a summary 
of available pharmacological, toxicological and clinical data on the 
individual ingredients should be submitted, along with the rationale for 
combining them in the proposed ratio. In addi tion, acute toxicity data (LD 
50) and pharmacological data should be submitted on the individual 
ingredients as well as their combination in the proposed ratio. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(c) The third group of FDCs includes those which are already marketed, but in 
which it is pr oposed either to change the ratio of active ingredients or to 
make a new therapeutic claim. For such FDCs, the appropriate rationale 
including published reports (if any) should be submitted to obtain 
marketing permission. Permission will be granted dependi ng upon the 
nature of the claim and data submitted. 
(d) The fourth group of FDC includes those whose individual active 
ingredients (or drugs from the same class) have been widely used in a 
particular indication(s) for years, their concomitant use is oft en necessary 
and no claim is proposed to be made other than convenience. It will have 
to be demonstrated that the proposed dosage form is stable and the 
ingredients are unlikely to have significant interaction of a 
pharmacodynamic or pharmacokinetic nature. 
No additional animal or human data are generally required for these FDCs, 
and marketing permission may be granted if the FDC has an acceptable 
rationale. 
APPENDIX VII 
UNDERTAKING BY THE INVESTIGATOR 
1. Full name, address and title of the Principal In vestigator [or Investigator(s) 
when there is no Principal Investigator]. 
2. Name and address of the medical college, hospital or other facility where 
the clinical trial will be conducted: Education, training and experience that 
qualify the Investigator for the clinical trial [Attach details including Medical 
Council registration number, and/or any other statement(s) of qualification(s)]. 
3. Name and address of all clinical laboratory facilities to be used in the study. 
4. Name and address of the Et hics Committee that is responsible for approval 
and continuing review of the study. 
5. Names of the other members of the research team (Co- or sub-investigators) 
who will be assisting the Investigator in the conduct of the investigation(s). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
6. Protocol title and Study number (if any) of the clinical trial to be conducted 
by the Investigator. 
7. Commitments: 
(i) I have reviewed the clinical protocol and agree that it contains all the 
necessary information to conduct the study. I will not begin th e study until 
all necessary Ethics Committee and regulatory approvals have been 
obtained. 
(ii) I agree to conduct the study in accordance with the current protocol. I 
will not implement any deviation from or changes of the protocol without 
agreement by the sponsor and prior review and documented approval/ 
favourable opinion from the Ethics Committee of the amendment, except 
where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) to the trial subjects or 
when the change(s) involved are only logistical or administrative in nature. 
(iii) I agree to personally conduct and/or supervise the clinical trial at my 
site. 
(iv) I agree to inform all subjects, that the drugs are being used for 
investigational purposes and I will ensure that the requirements relating to 
obtaining informed consent and Ethics Committee review and approval 
specified in the GCP guidelines are met. 
(v) I agree to report to the sponsor all adverse experiences that occur in 
the course of the investigation(s) in accordance with the regulat ory and 
GCP guidelines. 
(vi) I have read and understood the information in the Investigator's 
brochure, including the potential risks and side effects of the drug. 
(vii) I agree to ensure that all associates, colleagues and employees 
assisting in the conduct of the study are suitably qualified and experienced 
and they have been informed about their obligations in meeting their 
commitments in the trial. 
(viii) I agree to maintain adequate and accurate records and to make those 
records available for audit/inspection by the sponsor, Ethics Committee, 
Licensing Authority or their authorized representatives, in accordance with 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
regulatory and GCP provisions. I will fully cooperate with any study 
related audit conducted by regulatory officials or authorized representatives 
of the sponsor. 
(ix) I agree to promptly report to the Ethics Committee all changes in the 
clinical trial activities and all unanticipated problems involving risks to 
human subjects or others. 
(x) I agree to inform all unexpected se rious adverse events to the sponsor 
as well as the Ethics Committee within seven days of their occurrence. 
(xi) I will maintain confidentiality of the identification of all participating 
study patients and assure security and confidentiality of study data. 
(xii) I agree to comply with all other requirements, guidelines and statutory 
obligations as applicable to clinical Investigators participating in clinical 
trials. 
8. Signature of Investigator with date. 
APPENDIX VIII 
ETHICS COMMITTEE 
1316[I. Requirements and guidelines for registration of Ethics Committee 
1. Scope: 
Ethics Committee shall review every clinical trial proposal and evaluate the 
possible risks to the subjects, expected benefits and adequacy of documentation 
for ensuring privacy, confidentiality and justice. In the case of any serious 
adverse event occurring to the clinical trial subjects during the clinical trial, the 
Ethics. Committee shall analyse and forward us opinion as per procedures 
specified in APPENDIX XII of Schedule Y. 
2. Composition of Ethics Committee: 
(a) Ethics Committee shall consist of not less than seven members and 
one among its members, who is from outside the institute, shall be 
appointed as Chairman; one member as a Member Secretary and rest of the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
members shall be from Medical, Scientific, Non-medical and Non-scientific 
fields including lay public. 
(b) The committee shall include at least one member whose primary area 
of interest or specialization is Non-scientific and at least one member who is 
independent of the institution. Besides, there should be appropriate gender 
representation on the Ethics Committee. 
(c) The Ethics Committee can have as its members, individuals from other 
Institutions or Communities, if required. 
(d) Members should be conversant with the provisions of clinical trials 
under this Schedule, Good Clinical Practice Guidelines lor clinical trials in 
India and other regulatory requirements to safeguard the rights, safety and 
well-being of the trial subjects. 
(e) For review of each protocol the quorum of Ethics Committee shall be 
at least five members with the following representations: 
(i) basic medical scientist (preferably one pharmacologist); 
(ii) clinician; 
(iii) legal expert; 
(iv) social sc ientist or representative of non -governmental voluntary 
agency or philosopher or ethicist or theologian or a similar person; 
(v) lay person from community. 
(f) The members representing medical scientists and clinicians should 
have Post graduate qualification and adequate experience in their respective 
fields and aware of their role and responsibilities as committee members. 
(g) As far as possible, based on the requirement of research area such as 
HIV, Genetic disorder, etc., specific patient group may also be represented 
in the Ethics Committee. 
(h) There should be no conflict of interest. The members shall voluntarily 
withdraw from the Ethics Committee meeting while making a decision on 
an application which evokes a conflict of interest which ma y be indicated in 
writing to the Chairman prior to the review and be recorded so in the 
minutes, All members shall sign a declaration on conflict of interest, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(i) Subject experts or other experts may be invited to the meetings for their 
advice. But no such expert shall have voting rights. 
3. Information required to be submitted by the applicant for registration of 
Ethics Committee: 
(a) Name of the Ethics Committee. 
(b) Authority under which the Ethics Committee has been constituted, 
membership requirements, the term of reference, conditions of appointment 
and the quorum required. 
(c) The procedure for resignation, replacement or removal of members. 
(d) Address of the office of the Ethics Committee. 
(e) Name, address, qualification, organisa tional title, telephone number, 
fax number, e-mail, mailing address and brief profile of the Chairman. 
(f) Names, qualifications, organisational title, telephone number, fax 
number, e -mail and mailing address of the members of the Ethics 
Committee. The information shall also include member's specialty (primary, 
scientific or non -scientific), member's affiliation with institutions and 
patient group representation, if any. 
(g) Details of the supporting staff. 
(h) In the case of Ethics Committees exis ting before the publication of the 
Drugs and Cosmetics (Third Amendment) Rules, 2013,— 
(i) type of clinical research reviewed by the committee (e.g. 
Pharmaceuticals, devices, epidemiological, retrospective, herbals, 
etc.) 
(ii) documents reviewed for every clinical trial protocol including 
Informed Consent documents. 
(iii) information in respect of number of meetings of the 
committee and documentation of the minutes of meetings of these 
committees concerning clinical trials. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(iv) information rega rding review of serious adverse events 
reported during the conduct of the trial. 
(i) The standard operating procedures to be followed by the committee in 
general. 
(j) standard operating procedures to be followed by the committee for 
vulnerable population. 
(k) Policy regarding training for new and existing committee members along 
with standard operating procedures. 
(1) Policy to monitor or prevent the conflict of interest along with standard 
operating procedures. 
(m) If the committee has been audited or inspected before, give details. 
4. Maintenance of Record: 
All documentation and communication of an Ethics Committee are to be 
dated, filed and preserved according to the standard operating procedures. Strict 
confidentiality shall be maintained during acces s and retrieval procedures. 
Records should be maintained for the following, namely:— 
(a) The constitution and composition of the Ethics Committee; 
(b) The curriculum vitae of all the committee members; 
(c) Standard operating procedures followed by the committee; 
(d) National and international guidelines; 
(e) Copies of the protocol, data collection formats, Case Report Forms, 
Investigator's brochures, etc., submitted for review; 
(f) All correspondence with committee members and Investigator s 
regarding application, decision and follow up; 
(g) Agenda of all Ethics Committee meetings; 
(h) Minutes of all Ethics Committee meetings with signature of the 
Chairman; 
(i) Copies of decisions communicated to the applicants; 
(j) Record of all no tification issued for premature termination of a study 
with a summary of the reasons; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(k) Final report of the study including microfilms, compact disks or Video 
recordings. 
All records shall be safely maintained after the completion or termination of 
the study for not less than five years from the date of completion or termination 
of the trial (Both in hard and soft copies). 
5. The Ethics Committee shall be open to inspection by the officers authorised 
by the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation, who may include an 
officer of the State Drug Control Authority concerned, to verify compliance to 
the requirements of Schedule Y, Good Clinical Practices guidelines and other 
applicable regulation for safeguarding the rights, safety and well -being of the 
trial subjects.] 
1317[III. Format for According Approval to clinical trial protocol by the 
Ethics Committee] 
To 
Dr 
Dear Dr._____________ 
The Institutional Ethics Committee/Independent Ethics Committee (state name 
of the committee , as appropriate) reviewed and discussed your application to 
conduct the clinical trial entitled "......................" on ....................... (date). 
The following documents were reviewed:— 
(a) Trial Protocol (including protocol amendments), date d 
.............Version No.(s) .................. 
(b) Patient Information Sheet and Informed Consent Form (including 
updates, if any) in English and/or vernacular language. 
(c) Investigator's Brochure, dated ................ Version No................... 
(d) Proposed methods for patient accrual including advertisement(s) etc. 
proposed to be used for the purpose. 
(e) Principal Investigator's current CV. 
(f) Insurance Policy/Compensation for participation and for serious 
adverse events occurring during the study participation. 
(g) Investigator's Agreement with the sponsor. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(h) Investigator's Undertaking (Appendix VII). 

The following members of the Ethics Committee were present at the meeting 
held on (date, time, place). 
...........................Chairman of the Ethics Committee. 
...........................Member-Secretary of the Ethics Committee. 
...........................Name of each member with designation. 

We approve the trial to be conducted in its presented form. 

The Institutional Ethics Committee/Independent Ethics Committee expects to be 
informed about the progress of the study, any SAE occurring in the course of 
the study, any changes in the protocol and patient information/informed consent 
and asks to be provided a copy of the final report. 
Yours sincerely, 
Member-Secretary, Ethics Committee. 
APPENDIX IX 
STABILITY TESTING OF NEW DRUGS 
Stability testing is to be performed to provide evidence on how the quality of 
a drug substance or formulation varies with time under the influen ce of various 
environmental factors such as temperature, humidity and light, and to establish 
shelf life for the formulation and recommended storage conditions. 
Stability studies should include testing of those attributes of the drug 
substance that are sus ceptible to change during storage and are likely to 
influence quality, safety, and/ or efficacy. In case of formulations the testing 
should cover, as appropriate, the physical, chemical, biological, and 
microbiological attributes, preservative content (e.g., antioxidant, antimicrobial 
preservative), and functionality tests (e.g., for a dose delivery system). 
Validated stability indicating analytical procedures should be applied. For 
long-term studies, frequency of testing should be sufficient to establish t he 
stability profile of the drug substance. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
In general, a drug substance should be evaluated under storage conditions 
that test its thermal stability and, if applicable, its sensitivity to moisture. The 
storage conditions and the length of studies chosen should be sufficient to cover 
storage, shipment and subsequent use. 
Stress testing of the drug substance should be conducted to identify the 
likely degradation products, which in turn establish the degradation pathways, 
evaluate the intrinsic stability of t he molecule and validate the stability 
indicating power of the analytical procedures used. The nature of the stress 
testing will depend on the individual drug substance and the type of formulation 
involved. 
Stress testing may generally be carried out on a single batch of the drug 
substance. It should include the effect of temperature(s), humidity where 
appropriate, oxidation and photolysis on the drug substance. 
Data should be provided for (a) Photostability on at least one primary batch 
of the drug substance as well as the formulation, as the case may be, and (b) the 
susceptibility of the drug substance to hydrolysis across a wide range of pH 
values when in solution or suspension. 
Long-term testing should cover a minimum of 12 months' duration on at 
least three primary batches of the drug substance or the formulation at the time 
of submission and should be continued for a period of time sufficient to cover 
the proposed shelf life. Accelerated testing should cover a minimum of 6 
months duration at the time of submission. 
In case of drug substances, the batches should be manufactured to a 
minimum of pilot scale by the same synthetic route and using a method of 
manufacture that simulates the final process to be used for production batches. 
In case of formulation s, two of the three batches should be at least pilot scale 
and the third one may be smaller. The manufacturing process(es) used for 
primary batches should simulate that to be applied to production batches and 
should provide products of the same quality and meeting the same 
specifications as that intended for marketing. 
The stability studies for drug substances should be conducted either in the 
same container-closure system as proposed for storage and distribution or in a 
container-closure system that simulates the proposed final packaging. In case of 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
formulations, the stability studies should be conducted in the final container -
closure system proposed for marketing. 
Stability testing of new drug substances and formulations: 
(i) Study conditions for drug subs tances and formulations intended to be stored 
under general conditions 
Study Study conditions Duration of study 
Long-term 30° C ± 2° C/65% RH ± 5% RH 12 months 
Accelerated 40° C ± 2° C/75% RH ± 5% RH 6 months 

If at any time during 6 months' testing under the accelerated storage 
condition, such changes occur that cause the product to fail in complying with 
the prescribed standards, additional testing under an intermediate storage 
condition should be conducted and evaluated against significant change criteria. 
(ii) Study conditions for drug substances and formulations intended to be 
stored in a refrigerator 

Study Study conditions Duration of study 
Long-term 5° C ± 3° C 12 months 
Accelerated 25° C ± 2° C/60% RH ± 5% RH 6 months 

(iii) Study conditions for drug substances and formulations intended to be stored 
in a freezer 

(iv) Drug substances intended for storage below -20° C shall be treated on a 
case-by-case basis. 
Study Study conditions Duration of study 
Long-term -20° C° ± 5° C 12 months 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(v) Stability testing of the formulation after constitution or dilution, if 
applicable, should be conducted to provide information for the labelling on the 
preparation, storage condition, and in -use period of th e constituted or diluted 
product. This testing should be performed on the constituted or diluted product 
through the proposed in-use period. 
APPENDIX X 
CONTENTS OF THE PROPOSED PROTOCOL FOR CONDUCTING 
CLINICAL TRIALS 
1. Title Page— 
(a) Full title of the clinical study. 
(b) Protocol/Study number and protocol version number with date. 
(c) The IND name/number of the investigational drug. 
(d) Complete name and address of the sponsor and contract research 
organization, if any. 
(e) List of the Inv estigators who are conducting the study, their 
respective institutional affiliations and site locations. 
(f) Name(s) of clinical laboratories and other departments and/or 
facilities participating in the study. 
2. Table of Contents— 
A complete Table of Contents including a list of all Appendices. 
1. Background and Introduction 
(a) Pre-clinical experience 
(b) Clinical experience 
Previous clinical work with the new drug should be reviewed here and a 
description of how the current protocol extend s existing data should be 
provided. If this is an entirely new indication, how this drug was considered for 
this should be discussed. Relevant information regarding pharmacological, 
toxicological and other biological properties of the drug/ biologic/medica l 
device and previous efficacy and safety experience should be described. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2. Study Rationale 
This section should describe a brief summary of the background information 
relevant to the study design and protocol methodology. The reasons for 
performing t his study in the particular population included by the protocol 
should be provided. 
3. Study objective(s) (primary as well as secondary) and their logical 
relation to the study design. 
4. Study Design— 
(a) Overview of the Study Design: Including a description of the type 
of study (i.e., double-blind, multicentre, placebo controlled, etc.), a 
detail of the specific treatment groups and number of study subjects in 
each group and investigative site, subject number assignment, and the 
type, sequence and duration of study periods. 
(b) Flow chart of the study. 
(c) A brief description of the methods and procedures to be used 
during the study. 
(d) Discussion of Study Design.—This discussion details the rationale 
for the design chosen for this study. 
5. Study Population: The number of subjects required to be enrolled in the 
study at the investigative site and by all sites along with a brief description of 
the nature of the subject population required is also mentioned. 
6. Subject Eligibility— 
(a) Inclusion Criteria. 
(b) Exclusion Criteria. 
7. Study Assessments—Plan, procedures and methods to be described in 
detail. 
8. Study Conduct stating the types of study activities that would be 
included in this section would be: medical history, type of physical 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
examination, blood or urine testing, electrocardiogram (ECG), diagnostic 
testing such as pulmonary function tests, symptom measurement, dispensation 
and retrieval of medication, subject cohort assignment, adverse event review, 
etc. 
Each visit should be described separately as Visit 1, Visit 2, etc. 
Discontinued Subjects: Describes the circumstances for subject withdrawal, 
drop-outs, or other reasons for discontinuation of subjects. State how drop -outs 
would be managed and if they would be replaced, describe the method of 
handling of protocol waivers, if any. The person(s) who approves all such 
waivers should be identified and the criteria used for specific waivers should be 
provided. 
Describes how protocol violations will be treated, includ ing conditions 
where the study will be terminated for non-compliance with the protocol. 
9. Study Treatment— 
(a) Dosing schedule (dose, frequency and duration of the experimental 
treatment). Describe the administration of placebos and/or dummy 
medications if they are part of the treatment plan. If applicable, 
concomitant drug(s), their doses, frequency and duration of concomitant 
treatment should be stated. 
(b) Study drug supplies and administration: A statement about who is 
going to provide the stu dy medication and that the investigational drug 
formulation has been manufactured following all regulations. Details of 
the product stability, storage requirements and dispensing requirements 
should be provided. 
(c) Dose modification for study drug toxi city: Rules for changing the 
dose or stopping the study drug should be provided. 
(d) Possible drug interactions. 
(e) Concomitant therapy: The drugs that are permitted during the study 
and the conditions under which they may be used are detailed here. 
Describe the drugs that a subject is not allowed to use during parts of or 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
the entire study. If any washout periods for prohibited medications are 
needed prior to enrolment, these should be described here. 
(f) Blinding procedures: A detailed description of the blinding procedure 
if the study employs a blind on the Investigator and/or the subject. 
(g) Unblinding procedures: If the study is blinded, the circumstances in 
which unblinding may be done and the mechanism to be used for 
unblinding should be given. 
10. Adverse Events (See Appendix XT): Description of expected adverse 
events should be given. 
 Procedures used to evaluate an adverse event should be described. 
11. Ethical Considerations: Give the summary of— 
(a) Risk/benefit assessment: 
(b) Ethics Committee review and communications: 
(c) Informed consent process: 
(d) Statement of subject confidentiality including ownership of data and 
coding procedures: 
12. Study Monitoring and Supervision: A description of study monitoring 
policies and procedures should be provided along with the proposed frequency 
of site monitoring visits, and who is expected to perform monitoring. 
Case Record Form (CRF) completion requirements, including who gets 
which copies of the forms and any specifics r equired in filling out the forms, 
CRF correction requirements, including who is authorized to make corrections 
on the CRF and how queries about study data are handled and how errors, if 
any, are to be corrected should be stated. 
Investigator study files, i ncluding what needs to be stored following study 
completion should be described. 
13. Investigational Product Management— 
(a) Give Investigational product description and packaging (stating all 
ingredients and the formulation of the investigational dr ug and any 
placebos used in the study). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(b) The precise dosing required during the study. 
(c) Method of packaging, labelling and blinding of study substances. 
(d) Method of assigning treatments to subjects and the subject 
identification code numbering system. 
(e) Storage conditions for study substances. 
(f) Investigational product accountability: Describe instructions for the 
receipt, storage, dispensation, and return of the investigational 
products to ensure a complete accounting of all invest igational 
products received, dispensed and returned / destroyed. 
(g) Describe policy and procedure for handling unused investigational 
products. 
14. Data Analysis— 
Provide details of the statistical approach to be followed including sample 
size, how the sample size was determined, including assumptions made in 
making this determination, efficacy endpoints (primary as well as secondary) 
and safety endpoints. 
Statistical Analysis: Give complete details of how the results will be 
analyzed and reported along with the description of statistical tests to be used to 
analyze the primary and secondary endpoints defined above. Describe the level 
of significance, statistical tests to be used, and the methods used for missing 
data; method of evaluation of the data for treatment failures, non -compliance, 
and subject withdrawals, rationale and conditions for any interim analysis, if 
planned. 
Describe statistical considerations for Pharmacokinetic (PK) analysis, if 
applicable. 
15. Undertaking by the Investigator (See Appendix VII). 
16. Appendices.—Provide a study synopsis, copies of the informed consent 
documents (patient information sheet, informed consent form etc.); CRF and 
other data collection forms; a summary of relevant pre -clinical safety 
information and any other documents referenced in the clinical protocol. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
APPENDIX XI 
DATA ELEMENTS FOR REPORTING SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS 
OCCURRING IN A CLINICAL TRIAL 
1. Patient Details— 
Initials and other relevant identifier (hospital/OPD record number etc.)* 
Gender 
Age and/or date of birth 
Weight 
Height 
2. Suspected Drug(s)— 
Generic name of the drug* 
Indication(s) for which suspect drug was prescribed or tested Dosage form 
and strength 
Daily dose and regimen (specify units - e.g., mg, ml, mg/kg) 
Route of administration 
Starting date and time of day 
Stopping date and time or duration of treatment 
3. Other Treatment(s)— 
Provide the same information for concomitant drugs (including non -
prescription/OTC drugs) and non-drug therapies, as for the suspected drug(s). 
4. Details of Suspected Adverse Drug Reaction(s)— 
Full description of reaction(s) including body site and severity, as well as the 
criterion (or criteria) for regarding the report as serious. In addition to a 
description of the reported signs and symptoms, whenever possible, describe a 
specific diagnosis for the reaction.* 
Start date (and time) of onset of reaction 
Stop date (and time) or duration of reaction 
Dechallenge and rechallenge information 
Setting (e.g., hospital, out-patient clinic, home, nursing home) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
5. Outcome— 
Information on recovery and any sequelae; results of specific tests and/or 
treatment that may have been conducted. 
For a fatal outcome, cause of death and a comment on its possible relationship 
to the suspected reaction; Any post-mortem findings, 
Other information: Anything relevant to facilitate assessment of the case, such 
as medical history including allergy, drug or alcohol abuse; family history; 
findings from special investigations etc. 
6. Details about the Investigator*— 
Name: 
Address: 
Telephone number: 
Profession (Speciality): 
Date of reporting the event to Licensing Authority: 
Date of reporting the event to Ethics Committee overseeing the site: 
Signature of the Investigator 

Note.—Information marked* must be provided.] 
1318[APPENDIX XII 
COMPENSATION IN CASE OF INJURY OR DEATH DURING 
CLINICAL TRIAL 
1319[(1) In case of an injury occurring to the subject during the clinical trial, free 
medical management shall be given as long as required or till such time it is 
established that the injury is not related to the clinical trial, whichever is 
earlier.] 
(2) In case the injury occurring to the trial subject is related to the clinical 
trial, such subject shall also be entitled for financial compensation as per order 
of the Licensing Authority defined under clause (b) of rule 21, and the financial 
compensation will be over and above any expenses incurred on the medical 
management of the subject. 1320[In c ase, there is no permanent injury, the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
quantum of compensation shall be commensurate with the nature of the 
nonpermanent injury and loss of wages.] 
(3) In the case of clinical trial related death of the subject, his/her nominee(s) 
would be entitled for financial compensation, as per the order of the Licensing 
Authority defined under clause (b) of rule 21, and the financial compensation 
will be over and above any expenses incurred on the medical management of 
the subject. 
(4) The financial compensation for clinical trial related injury or death could 
be in the form of:— 
(a) payment for medical management; 
(b) financial compensation for trial related injury; 
(c) financial compensation to nominee(s) of the trial subject in case of 
death; 
(d) financial compensation for the child injured in -utero because of the 
participation of parent in clinical trial. 
(5) The Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission 
from the Licensing Authority for conduct of the clinical trial, shall provide 
financial compensation, if the injury or death has occurred because of any of the 
following reasons, namely:— 
(a) adverse effect of investigational product(s); 
(b) any clinical trial procedures involved in the study; 
(c) violation of the approved protocol, scientific misconduct or negligence 
by the Sponsor or his representative or the Investigator; 
(d) failure of investigational product to provide intended therapeutic effect 
1320[where, the standard care, tho ugh available, was not provided to 
the subject as per the clinical trial protocal]; 
(e) use of placebo in a placebo -controlled trial 1320[where, the standard 
care, though available, was not provided to the subject as per the 
clinical trial protocal]; 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(f) adverse effects due to concomitant medication excluding standard care, 
necessitated as part of approved protocol; 
(g) Injury to the child in -utero because of the participation of parent in 
clinical trial. 
(6) Procedure for payment of financial compensation 
(a) The Investigator shall report all serious 1321[***] adverse events to the 
Licensing Authority as defined under clause (b) of rule 21, the 
Sponsor or his representative whosoever had ob tained permission 
from the Licensing Authority for conduct of the clinical trial and the 
Ethics Committee that accorded approval to the study protocol, within 
twenty four hours of their occurrence as per Appendix XI. 1322[In case, 
the Investigator fails to report any serious adverse event within the 
stipulated period, he shall have to furnish the reason for the delay to 
the satisfaction of the Licensing Authority along with the report of the 
serious adverse event.] 
(b) (i) The cases of serious adverse events of death shall be examined as 
under: 
(A)An independent Expert Committee shall be constituted by the 
licensing Authority as defined under rule 21 (b) to examine the 
cases and recommend to the Licensing Authority for the purpose of 
arriving at the cause of death and quantum of compensation in case 
of clinical trial related death. 
(B) The Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained 
permission from the Licensing Authority for conducting the 
clinical trial, and the Inve stigator shall forward their reports on 
serious adverse event of death after due analysis to Chairman of the 
Ethics Committee and 1323[***] the Licensing Authority as defined 
under rule 21 (b) and the head of the Institution whe re the trial has 
been conducted, within 1324[fourteen days] of occurrence of the 
serious adverse event of death. 
(C)The Ethics Committee shall forward its report on serious adverse 
event of death after due analysis along with it s opinion on the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
financial compensation, if any, to be paid by the Sponsor or his 
representative, 'whosoever had obtained permission from the 
Licensing Authority as defined under rule 21(b) for conducting the 
clinical trial, 1325[***] to the Licensing Authority within 1326[thirty 
days] of the occurrence of the serious adverse event of death. 
1327[(CA) The Licensing Authority shall forward the report of the 
Investigator, Sponsor or his representative whosoever had obtained 
permission from the Licensing Authority for conducting clinical 
trial and the Ethics Committee to the Chairman of the Expert 
Committee.] 
(D) The Expert Committee shall examine the report of serious adverse 
event of death and give its recommendations to the Licensing 
Authority for the purpose of arriving at the cause of the adverse 
event within 1328[one hundred and five days of the occurrence of 
the adverse event] and the Expert Com mittee while examining the 
event, may take into consideration, the reports of the Investigator, 
Sponsor or his representative whosoever had obtained permission 
from the Licensing Authority for conducting the clinical trial and 
the Ethics Committee. 
(E) In the case of clinical trial related death, the Expert Committee 
shall also recommend the quantum of compensation to be paid by 
the Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained 
permission from the Licensing Authority as defined under rule 
21(b) for conducting the clinical trial. 
(F) The Licensing Authority shall consider the recommendations of the 
Expert Committee and shall determine the cause of death and pass 
orders as deemed necessary. 
(G) In case of clinical trial related death, the Licensing Aut hority, after 
considering the recommendations of the Expert Committee, shall 
decide the quantum of compensation to be paid by the Sponsor or 
his representative, whosoever had obtained permission from the 
Licensing Authority for conducting the clinical tria l and shall pass 
orders as deemed necessary within 1329[one hundred and fifty days 
of the occurrence of the adverse event]. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
(ii) Cases of serious adverse events, other than deaths, shall be examined as 
under: 
(A) The Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission 
from the Licensing Authority for conducting the clinical trial, and the 
Investigator shall forward their reports on serious adverse event, after 
due analysis, to the Licensing Authority as defined un der rule 21(b), 
Chairman of the Ethics Committee and the head of the Institution 
where the trial has been conducted within 1330[fourteen days] of 
occurrence of the serious adverse event. 
(B) The Ethics Committee shall forward its report on the serious adverse 
event, after due analysis, along with its opinion regarding the financial 
compensation, if any, to be paid by the Sponsor or his representative, 
whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority as 
defined un der rule 21(b) for conducting the clinical trial, to the 
Licensing Authority within 1331[thirty days] of occurrence of the 
serious adverse event. 
(C) The Licensing Authority shall determine the cause of injury and pass 
order as deemed necessary. The Licensing Authority shall have the 
option to constitute an independent Expert Committee, wherever 
considered necessary, to examine such serious adverse events of 
injury, which will recommend to the Licensing Authority for arriving 
at the cause of the injury and also the quantum of compensation in 
case of clinical trial related injury, to be paid by the Sponsor or his 
representative whosoever haa obtained permission from the Licensing 
Authority as defined under rule 21(b) for conducting the clinical trial. 
(D) In case of clinical trial related injury, the Licensing Authority, shall 
decide the quantum of compensation to be paid by the Sponsor or his 
representative whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing 
Authority for co nducting the clinical trial, and shall pass orders as 
deemed necessary within 1332[one hundred and fifty days of the 
occurrence of the adverse event]. 
(c) The Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission from 
the Licensing Authority for conducting the clinical trial, shall pay the 
compensation in case of clinical trial related injury or death as per the order of 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
the Licensing Authority as defined under rule 21(b) within thirty days of the 
receipt of such order.] 
****** 
REFERENCES 
1. Vide Notification No. F.28-10/45H (1), dated 21st December, 1945. 
2. Subs. By G.S.R. 370(E), dated 7th April, 1994 (w.e.f. 7-4-1994). 
3. The words “and cosmetics” omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15 th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
Earlier it was inserted by G.S.R. 1183, dated 17th August, 1964. 
4. The words "except the State of Jammu and Kashmir" omitted by G.S.R. 358, dated 5th Ma rch, 1975. 
5. Sub-rule (3) omitted by G.S.R.19, dated 15 th December, 1977(w.e.f. 7-1-1978). 
6. Ins. By G.S.R. 327(E), dated 3rd April, 2017 (w.e.f. 3-4-2017). 
7. 
Subs. By G.S.R. 579(E), dated 20th September, 2006, for clause (b) (w.e.f. 20-09-2006). Earlier clause 
(b) was omitted by G.S.R. 19, 15th December, 1977 (w.e.f. 7-1-1978) and was again inserted by G.S.R. 
973(E), dated 14th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 14-12-1992). 
8. Subs. By S.O. 4816, dated 19th November, 1969. 
9. Ins. by G.S.R. 101(E), dated 11th February, 2020 (w.e.f. 1-3-2021). 
10. Ins. by G.S.R. 680(E), dated 5th December, 1980 (w.e.f. 5-12-1980). 
11. Clause (ea) re-lettered as clause (eb) by G.S.R. 101(E), dated 11th February, 2020 (w.e.f. 1 -3-2021). 
12. Ins. by G.S.R. 918(E), dated 30th November, 2015 (w.e.f. 30-11-2015). 
13. Clause (eb) re-lettered as clause (ec) by G.S.R. 101(E), dated 11th February, 2020 (w.e.f. 1 -3-2021). 
14. Added by Notification No. F. 1-22/59-D, dated 9th April, 1960. 
15. Ins. by S.O. 2139, dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
16. Subs. Notification No. F. 1-3/51-D.S., dated 15th October, 1954. 
17. Ins. by G.S.R. 681(E), dated 6th June, 1988 (w.e.f. 6-6-1988). 
18. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-16/57-D, dated 15th June, 1957. 
19. Subs. by Notification No. F. 28-10/45-H(1), dated 31st March, 1957. 
20. 
Clause (j) omitted by G.S.R. 592(E), dated 13 th August, 2008 (w.e.f. 13-8-2008). Clause (j), before 
omission, stood as under: 
“(j) “Poisonous substance specified in Schedule E”. 
21. Clause (ii) omitted by Notification No. F. 1-16/57-D, dated 15th June, 1957. 
22. Subs. by Notification No. F. 4-1/60-D, dated 15th May, 1961. 
23. Subs. by G.S.R. 445(E), dated 30th April, 1992 (w.e.f. 30-4-1992). 
24. Ins. by G.S.R. 445(E), dated 30th April, 1992 (w.e.f. 30-4-1992). 
25. Ins. by G.S.R. 249(E), dated 4th April, 2002. (w.e.f. 4-4-2002). 
26. Added by Notification No. F 1-6/62-D, dated 2nd July, 1969. 
27. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 651(E), dated 9th September, 2009, for sub-rule (3) (w.e.f. 9-9-2009). Earlier sub-rule 
(3) was added by S.O. 2139, dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). Sub-rule (3), before substitution, 
stood as under: 
"(3) The functions of the Laboratory in respect of condoms shall be carried out at the Central Indian 
Pharmacopoeia Laboratory, Ghaziabad and the functions of the Director in respect of the said condoms 
shall be exercised by the Director of the said Laboratory.". 
28. Added by G.S.R. 2655, dated 25th October, 1975 (w.e.f. 25-10-1975). 
29. Sub-rule (4) omitted and (5) renumbered as sub-rule (4) by G.S.R. 62€, dated 15th February, 1982 
(w.e.f. 15-12-1982). 
30. Subs. by G.S.R. 242(E), dated 18th March, 1998 (w.e.f. 6-5-1998). 
31. Ins. by G.S.R. 16(E), dated 16th January, 1990. 
32. Ins. by G.S.R. 246(E), dated 1st May, 1991 (w.e.f. 1-5-1991), (inadvertently mentioned as (7) in 
Gazette Notification). 
33. Subs. By G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for “Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia Laboratory, 
Ghaziabad” (w.e.f. 23-3-2021). 
34. Subs. By G.S.R. 908(E), dated 22nd December, 2014, for sub-rule (8) (w.e.f. 22-12-2014). Earlier sub-

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
rule (8) was inserted by G.S.R. 249(E), dated 4 th April, 2002 (w.e.f. 4-4-2002). Sub-rule (8), before 
substitution, stood as under: 

“(8) The functions of the Laboratory in respect of Blood Grouping reagents and diagnostic kits for 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Hepatitis B Surface Antigen and Hepatitis C Virus shall be carried 
out at the National Institute of Biologicals, Noida and the functions of the Director in respect of the 
said drugs shall be exercised by the Director of the said laboratory.” 
35. Ins. By G.S.R. 250(E) , dated 15th March , 2017 (w.e.f. 15-3-2017) 
36. Ins. By G.S.R. 213(E) , dated 11th March , 2019 (w.e.f. 11-3-2019) 
37. Subs. By G.S.R. 604(E) , dated 24th August , 2001 for the heading “IMPORT” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2003). 
38. Subs. By G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
39. The words “specified in Schedules C and C(1)” omitted by G.S.R. 604(E) dated 24 th August, 2001 
(w.e.f. 1-1-2003) 
40. Ins. By G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 1-1-2003). 
41. Subs. By G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for “power to sign licences and” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2003). 
42. Subs. By G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
43. Subs. By G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for “import of any biological or other special 
product specified in Schedule C or C(1)” (w.e.f. 1-1-2003). 
44. Subs. By G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for rule 24 (w.e.f. 1-1-2003). 
45. Subs. By G.S.R. 1193(E), dated 12th December, 2018 for “one thousand rupees for a single drug and an 
additional fee at the rate of one hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 12-12-2018) 
46. Subs. By G.S.R. 1193(E), dated 12th December, 2018 for “one hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 12-12-2018) 
47. Ins. by G.S.R. 35(E), dated 20th January, 2005 (w.e.f. 20-1-2005) 
48. Subs, by G.S.R. 1193(E), dated 12th December, 2018 for “two hundred and fifty rupees shall be paid" 
(w.e.f. 12-12-2018). 
49. The words "or for a duplicate copy of the licence issued under this rule, if the original is defaced, 
damaged or lost" omitted by G.S.R. 839(E), dated 29th November, 2021 (w.e.f. 29 -11-2021). 
50. Ins. by G.S.R. 604(E) dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 1-1-2003). 
51. Subs, by G.S.R. 1193(E), dated 12th December, 2018 for "one thousand and five hundred US dollars" 
(w.e.f. 12-12-2018). 
52. Subs, by G.S.R. 1193(E), dated 12th December, 2018 for "one thousand US dollars" (w.e.f. 12 -12-
2018). 
53. Subs, by G.S.R. 1193(E), dated 12th December, 2018 for "five thousand US dollars" (w.e.f. 12 -12-
2018). 
54. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 1193(E), dated 12th December, 2018, for "three hundred US dollars or its equivalent 
in Indian rupees shall be paid" (w.e.f. 12-12-2018). Earlier these words were amended by G.S.R. 
35(E), dated 20th January, 2005 (w.e.f. 20-1-2005). 
55. Added by Notification No. F.1-19/48-D, dated 27th October, 1949. 
56. Sub-rule (2) omitted by S.O.R. 2136, dated 15th June, 1957 
57. Subs. By G.S.R. 462(E, dated 22ng June 1982, for rule 25A (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). Earlier rule 25A was 
inserted by Notification No. F1-9/52-D, dated 3rd November, 1958. 
58. Subs. By G.S.R. 604(E) dated 24th August, 2001, for sub clause (i) (w.e.f. 1-1-2003) 
59. Ins. By G.S.R. 604(E) dated 24th August, 2001(w.e.f. 1-1-2003) 
60. Ins. By G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
61. Ins. By G.S.R. 604(E) dated 24th August, 2001(w.e.f. 1-1-2003) 
62. Subs. by Notification No. F.1-10/62-D, dated 19th April, 1964. 
63. Subs. By G.S.R. 604(E) dated 24th August, 2001, for “valid upto the 31st December pf the year 
following the year in which it is granted” (w.e.f. 1-1-2003) 
64. Ins. By G.S.R. 604(E) dated 24th August, 2001(w.e.f. 1-1-2003) 
65. 
Subs. By G.S.R. 604(E) dated 24th August, 2001, for the proviso (as given below)( w.e.f. 1-1-2003). 
“Provided that a person who is aggrieved by the suspension or cancellation of his licence ma y, within 
three months of the date of the o rder, appeal to the district judge of the district in which the right of 
appeal accrues or if there is no district judge of that disctrict such judicial officer as the Central 
Government may appoint in this behalf having jurisdiction whose decision shall be final.” 
66. Omitted by G.S.R. 944(E), dated 21st September, 1988 (w.e.f. 21-9-1988). Earlier rule 30A was added 
by Notification No. F. 1-30/48, dated 14th April, 1952. 
67. Added by Notification No. F. 1-30/48, dated 14th April, 1952. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
68. Subs, by G.S.R. 680(E), dated 5th December, 1980 (w.e.f. 5-12-1980). 
69. Added by Notification No. F. 1-45, dated 4th January, 1951. 
70. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for rule 31 (w.e.f. 1-1-2003). Rule 31, before 
substitution, stood as under: 
"31. Standard for certain imported drugs .—No biological or other special products specified in 
Schedule C or C(l) shall be imp orted unless it complies with the standard of strength, quality and 
purity, if any, specified, and the tests prescribed in that Schedule shall be applicable for determining 
whether any such imported drugs complies with the said standards: 

Provided that i n the case of biological and other special products intended for veterinary use the 
standards of strength, quality and purity, if any, shall be those that are specified in Schedule F(l) and 
the tests prescribed in that Schedule shall be applicable for dete rmining whether any such imported 
drug complies with the said standards and where no standards are specified in Schedule F(l) for any 
veterinary drug, the standards for such drug shall be those specified in the current edition, for the time 
being in force, of the British Pharmacopoeia (Veterinary)." 
71. Subs, by S.O. 2889, dated 2nd July, 1969 (w.e.f. 19-7-1969). 
72. The words "and Schedule F", omitted by G.S.R. 663(E), dated 3rd July, 1992, (w.e.f. 3 -7-1992). 
73. Added by S.O. 2139, dated 5th June, 1972, (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
74. Ins. By G.S.R. 604(E) dated 24th August, 2001(w.e.f. 1-1-2003) 
75. Subs. By G.S.R. 604(E) dated 24th August, 2001, for sub-rule(3) ( w.e.f. 1-1-2003). Earlier sub-rule (3) 
was added by S.O. 903, dated 10th February, 1976 (w.e.f. 28-2-1976) 
76. Subs, by G.S.R. 1193(E), dated 12th December, 2018 for "one hundred rupees for a s ingle drug and an 
additional fee of fifty rupees" (w.e.f. 12-12-2018). 
77. Ins. By G.S.R. 604(E) dated 24th August, 2001(w.e.f. 1-1-2003) 
78. Subs, by G.S.R. 1193(E), dated 12th December, 2018 for "one hundred rupees for a single drug and an 
additional fee of fifty rupees" (w.e.f. 12-12-2018). 
79. Ins. By G.S.R. 604(E) dated 24th August, 2001(w.e.f. 1-1-2003) 
80. Ins. By S.R.O. 560, dated 3rd March, 1955 
81. Ins. by G.S.R. 521(E), dated 1st June , 2018 (w.e.f. 1-6-2018). 
82. Ins. by G.S.R. 103(E), dated 2nd February, 2017 (w.e.f. 2-2-2017). 
83. Subs, by Notification No. F. 1-3/51-D.S. (S.R.O. 3262), dated 15th October, 1954. 
84. Ins. by Notification No. F. 1-45/58-D, (S.O. 115), dated 4th January, 1961 (w.e.f. 14-2-1961). 
85. Subs, by Notification No. F. 1-99/52-D.S., dated 3rd November, 1953. 
86. Subs, by Notification No. F. 7-7/47-D, dated 5th January, 1954. 
87. Added by Notification No. F. 7-11-47/D, dated 15th January, 1951. 
88. Rule 42 omitted by Notification No. F. 1-9/52-D.S., dated 3rd November, 1953 
89. Subs. By G.S.R. 478(E) dated 6th August, 1981, for rule 43A (w.e.f. 6-8-1981). Earlier rule 43A was 
inserted by Notification No. F.7-7/47-D, dated 5th January, 1954. 
90. Ins. By G.S.R. 116(E), dated 24th February, 2009 (w.e.f. 24-2-2009). 
91. Ins. By G.S.R. 120(E), dated 5th March, 1998 (w.e.f 5-3-1998) 
92. 
Subs. By G.S.R. 532(E) dated 18th May, 2016, (w.e.f. 18-5-2016). Earlier these words were substituted 
by G.S.R.575(E) dated 17th July, 2012 (w.e.f. 17-7-2012), G.S.R. 101(E) dated 18th February 2011 
(w.e.f. 18-2-2011), G.S.R. 45(E) dated 21st January , 2010 (w.e.f. 21-1-2010), G.S.R. 504(E) dated 18th 
July, 2002 (w.e.f. 18-2-2002)and G.S.R. 647(E) dated 28th October, 1998 (w.e.f. 28-10-1998). 
93. 
Subs. By G.S.R. 41(E) dated 17th January , 2017, for “Chennai, Kolkata, Mumbai, Cochin, Nhava 
Sheva, Kandla, Inland Container Depots at Tuglakabad and Patparganj in Delhi, Tuticorin in Tamil 
Nadu, Murmugao Port in Goa and Visakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh: in respect of drugs imported by 
sea into India;” (w.e.f. 17-1-2017) 
94. Subs. By G.S.R. 20(E) dated 10th January 2019, for “Tuticorin” (w.e.f. 10-1-2019) 
95. Subs. By G.S.R. 20(E) dated 10th January 2019, for “Gandhinagar” (w.e.f. 10-1-2019) 
96. Ins. By G.S.R. 653(E) dated 13th September , 2019 (w.e.f. 13-9-2019) 
97. Subs. By G.S.R. 848(E) dated 9th December, 2021, for “Inland container Depot Dhannad” (w.e.f. 9-12-
2021). 
98. Added by S.O. 1056(E) dated 19th March, 1964 (w.e.f. 28-3-1964) 
99. Subs. By G.S.R. 443(E) dated 12th April, 1989 (w.e.f. 12-4-1989). 
100. Subs. By G.S.R. 1427(E) dated 10th October, 1977 (w.e.f. 22-10-1977) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
101. Subs. by G.S.R. 71(E) dated 30th January, 1987 (w.e.f. 30.01.1987). 
102. Subs. By G.S.R. 697(E) dated 26th October, 1995 (w.e.f. 26-10-1995). 
103. Ins. By G.S.R. 697(E) dated 26th October, 1995 (w.e.f. 26-10-1995). 
104. Subs. By G.S.R. 697(E) dated 26th October, 1995 (w.e.f. 26-10-1995). 
105. The words "and cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). 
Earlier it was added by S.O. 2139, dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
106. Ins. by G.S.R. 103(E), dated 2nd February, 2017 (w.e.f. 2-2-2017). 
107. Ins. by G.S.R. 59(E), dated 7th February, 1995 (w.e.f. 7-2-1995). 
108. Subs, by G.S.R. 59(E), dated 7th February, 1995 (w.e.f. 7-2-1995). 
109. Added by G.S.R. 984(E) dated 12th July, 1962 (w.e.f. 21-7-1962). 
110. The words "and cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
Earlier it was inserted by G.S.R. 1140(E) dated 26 th August, 1978 (w.e.f. 16-9-1978) 
111. Subs. By G.S.R. 658(E) dated 19th October, 1993 (w.e.f. 19-10-1993) 
112. Added by G.S.R. 552(E) dated 4th December, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-12-1996) 
113. Ins. By G.S.R. 443(E) dated 12th April, 1989 (w.e.f. 12-4-1989). 
114. Subs. By G.S.R. 532(E) dated 14th August, 1991 (w.e.f. 14-8-1991). 
115. Subs. By S.O. 2139(E) dated 5th June 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972) 
116. Ins. By G.S.R. 443(E) dated 12th April, 1989 (w.e.f. 12-4-1989). 
117. Subs. By G.S.R. 532(E) dated 14th August, 1991 (w.e.f. 14-8-1991). 
118. Subs. By G.S.R. 700(E) dated 28th September, 2001 (w.e.f. 28-9-2001). 
119. Subs. By G.S.R. 504(E) dated 18th July, 2002 (w.e.f. 18-7-2002) 
120. The words "or cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). 
121. Subs. By G.S.R. 700(E) dated 28th September, 2001 (w.e.f. 28-9-2001). 
122. Added by Notification No. F. 1-19/59-D, dated 13th June, 1961.(w.e.f. 24-6-1961) 
123. The words "or cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). 
Earlier it was inserted by G.S.R. 850(E), dated 7th December, 1994 (w.e.f. 7-12-1994). 
124. Subs. by G.S.R. 926, dated 24th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16-7-1977). 
125. The words "cosmetic" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
126. The words "or cosmetic" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). 
127. Ins. By G.S.R. 89(E) dated 16th February, 1985 (w.e.f. 16-2-1985) 
128. Ins. By G.S.R. 292(E) dated 29th May, 1997 (w.e.f.29-5-1997) 
129. Subs. By S.O. 289, dated 20th December, 1972 (w.e.f. 3-2-1973) 
130. Added Notification No. F. 1-9/62-D (G.S.R. 6), dated 26th December, 1964 (w.e.f. 2-1-1965) 
131. Subs. by G.S.R. 59 (E), dated 7th February, 1995 (w.e.f. 7-2-1995). 
132. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
133. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017) 
134. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
135. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
136. 
Sub-rule (4) and the proviso omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E) dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
Earlier sub-rule (4) was amended by G.S.R. 788(E) dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985) and 
G.S.R. 601(E) dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
137. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-16/57-D, dated 15th June, 1957. 
138. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
139. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
140. Subs, by G.S.R. 487(E), dated 2nd July, 1984 (w.e.f. 2-7-1984). 
141. Added by Notification No. F. 10-21/49-D, dated 10th March, 1953. 
142. Added by Notification No. F. 1-9/60-D, dated 3rd July, 1961 (w.e.f. 8-7-1961). 
143. Added by Notification No. F. 1-9/60-D, dated 3rd July, 1961 (w.e.f. 8-7-1961). 
144. The words "or renew" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
145. Ins. By G.S.R. 42(E) dated 25th January, 1979 (w.e.f. 25-1-1979). 
146. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017) 
147. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for “a fee of rupees twenty” (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
148. Proviso omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E) dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). Earlier proviso was 
amended by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for “a fee of rupees twenty” (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
149. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for “a fee of rupees twenty” (w.e.f. 24 -8-2001). 
150. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). Earlier rule 63 was substituted 
by Notification No. F. 1-10/62-D, dated 10th April, 1964 and amended by S.O. 2139(E), dated 5th June, 
1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972) and by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2001). 
151. 
Rule 63A omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). Earlier rule 63A 
was added by Notification No. F. 1-10/62-D, dated 10th April, 1964 and amended by G.S.R. 462(E), 
dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
152. Rule 63B omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). Earlier rule 63B 
was inserted by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
153. Amended by Notification No. F. 1-16/57-D, dated 15th June, 1957 and Notification No. F. 1-19/59-D, 
dated 13th June, 1961. 
154. Subs. By G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
155. The words "or renewed" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
Earlier these words were inserted by G.S.R. 681(E) dated 6 th June, 1988 (w.e.f. 6-6-1988). 
156. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
157. Subs. By G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
158. The words "or renewing" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
Earlier these words were inserted by G.S.R. 681(E) dated 6 th June, 1988 (w.e.f. 6-6-1988). 
159. Subs. By Notification No. F. 1-19/59-D, dated 13th June, 1961. 
160. The words "or renew" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
161. The words "or renewed" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
Earlier these words were inserted by G.S.R. 681(E) dated 6 th June, 1988 (w.e.f. 6-6-1988). 
162. Ins. By G.S.R. 681(E) dated 5th December , 1980 (w.e.f. 5-12-1980) 
163. Subs. By G.S.R. 351(E) dated 26th April, 2000(w.e.f. 26-4-2000) 
164. Ins. By G.S.R. 91(E) dated 25th February, 1997 (w.e.f. 25-2-1997) 
165. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-9/60-D (S.O. 1588), dated 3rd July, 1961 (w.e.f. 8-7-1961). 
166. Subs. By G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
167. Subs. By G.S.R. 676(E), dated 6th September, 1994 (w.e.f. 6-9-1994). 
168. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 462(E) dated 22 nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982) 
169. Subs. By S.O. 2139, dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
170. Subs. by G.S.R. 926, dated 24th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16-7-1977). 
171. Subs. by G.S.R. 588(E) dated 30th August, 2013, for Schedule H" (w.e.f. 27-2-2014). 
172. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
173. Subs. by G.S.R. 588(E) dated 30th August, 2013, for Schedule H" (w.e.f. 27-2-2014). 
174. Ins. by G.S.R. 588(E) dated 30th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27-2-2014). 
175. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
176. Added by Notification No. 1-63/61-D, dated 17th July, 1963. 
177. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 462(E) dated 22 nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982) 
178. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
179. Ins. By G.S.R. 245(E) dated 3rd February, 1976 (w.e.f. 21-2-1976) or (w.e.f.11-2-1976) 
180. Item(b) re-numbered as item(c), by G.S.R. 245(E) dated 3 rd February, 1976 (w.e.f. 21-2-1976) 
181. Subs. By G.S.R. 1242(E) dated 17th September, 1976 (w.e.f. 6-10-1979). 
182. Subs. By Notification No. F.1-63/62-D, dated 17th July, 1963. 
183. Ins. By 496(E) dated 9th June, 1995 (w.e.f. 9-6-1995) 
184. Subs. By G.S.R. 1242, dated 17th September, 1979 (w.e.f. 6-10-1979). 
185. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
186. Subs. by G.S.R. 588(E) dated 30th August, 2013, for Schedule H" (w.e.f. 27-2-2014). 
187. Subs. by G.S.R. 926, dated 24th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16-7-1977). 
188. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
189. Added by S.O. 2139, dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
190. Clauses (13) and (14) omitted by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e. f. 22-6-1982). 
191. Subs, by Notification No. F. 1-16/57-D, dated 15th June, 1957. 
192. Subs. by G.S.R. 676(E), dated 6th September, 1994 (w.e.f. 6-9-1994). 
193. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-14/68-D (S.O. 3868), dated 26th October, 1968 (w.e.f. 2-11-1968). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
194. Added by Notification No. F. 1-55/61-D, dated 22nd August, 1964 (w.e.f. 5-9-1964). 
195. Added by S.O. 903, dated 10th February, 1976 (w.e.f. 28-2-1976) 
196. Added by Notification No. F. 1-113/60-D (S.O. 23), dated 23rd December, 1969 (w.e.f. 3-1-1970). 
197. Subs. by G.S.R. 676(E), dated 6th September, 1994 (w.e.f. 6-9-1994). 
198. Subs. By 496(E) dated 9th June, 1995 (w.e.f. 9-6-1995) 
199. Ins. By G.S.R. 352(E) dated 26th April, 2000 (w.e.f. 26-4-2000) 
200. Added by G.S.R. 444, dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973). 
201. Subs. by G.S.R. 676(E), dated 6th September, 1994 (w.e.f. 6-9-1994). 
202. Added by G.S.R. 926, dated 24th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16-7-1977). 
203. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
204. Added by S.O. 2139, dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
205. Ins. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
206. 
Subs. By G.S.R. 73(E) dated 31st January, 2003, for Part XVIA (w.e.f. 31-1-2003). Ed.-Though in 
G.S.R. 73(E), it is stated that it is to be inserted but in fact it has been substituted. Earlier Part XVIA 
was inserted by G.S.R. 701(E) dated 27th September, 2001 (w.e.f. 28-9-2001). 
207. Ins. By G.S.R. 716(E) dated 1st October, 2021 (w.e.f. 4-10-2021) 
208. 
Ed.- As per G.S.R. 674(E) dated 10th November, 2005 (w.e.f. 10-11-2005) in rule 160B, in sub-rule 
(2), in clause (ii) sub-clause(b) is to be substituted as the substituted text is not in consonance with the 
original text, hence it is reproduced below: 

In Rule 160B in sub-rule (2), in clause (ii), for sub-clause (b), the following shall be substituted for 
testing and analysis of Ayurveda, Siddha & Unani drugs namely:- 
“(i) Expert in Ayurveda or Siddha or Unani medicine who possess a degree qualification recognized 
under Schedule II of Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970; 
(ii) Chemist, who shall possess at least Bachelor Degree in Science or Pharmacy (Ayurveda) awarded 
by a recognized University ; and 
(iii) Botanist (Pharmacologist), who shall possess at least Bachelor Degree in Science (M edical or 
Pharmacy) or Pharmacy (Ayurveda) awarded by a recognized University.” 
209. Added by S.O. 2139, dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
210. Subs. by G.S.R. 926, dated 24th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16-7-1977). 
211. Ins. By G.S.R. 1242, dated 17th September, 1979 (w.e.f. 6-10-1979). 
212. Rule 67 omitted by S.O. 289, dated 20 th December, 1972 (w.e.f. 3-2-1973) 
213. Part VIA (containing rules 67A to 67E, 67F, 67G and 67H) added by Notification No. F. 1 -35/64-D, 
dated 18th August, 1964 (w.e.f. 22-8-1964) 
214. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
215. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for certain words (w.e.f. 24 -8-2001).Earlier these 
words were substituted by G.S.R. 779(E) dated 18 th July, 1980(w.e.f. 26-7-1980) 
216. Subs. By S.O. 2139, dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
217. Added by G.S.R.665(E) dated 6th May , 1977(w.e.f. 28-5-1977) 
218. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
219. Ins. By G.S.R. 1380(E) dated 10th November, 2017 (w.e.f. 10-11-2017) 
220. Added by Notification no. F.1-14/67-D, dated 3rd February, 1969. 
221. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
222. Subs. By G.S.R. 1380(E) dated 10th November, 2017, for “who is in opinion of the licensing authority 
competent to deal in Homeopathic medicines.” (w.e.f. 10-11-2017) 
223. 
Subs by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017, for proviso (w.e.f. 10 -11-2017). Earlier proviso 
was inserted by G.S.R. 680(E) dated 5th December, 1980 (w.e.f. 5-12-1980). Proviso, before 
substitution , stood as under: 
“Provided that no registered Homeopathic medical practitioner who is practising Homeopathy in the 
premises where Homeopathic medicines are sold shall deal in Homeopathic medicines.” 
224. 
Subs by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017, for proviso (w.e.f. 10 -11-2017). Clause (2), 
before substitution, stood as under: 
“(2) The sale of Homeopathic medicines shall be conducted under the supervision of a person, 
competent to deal in Homeopathic medicines.” 
225. Added by Notification No. F. 1-59/68-D (S.O. 4816), dated 19th November , 1969 (w.e.f. 6-12-1969) 
226. Ins. By G.S.R. 331(E) dated 8th May, 1984 (w.e.f.8-5-1984) 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
227. Added by S.O. 2139, dated 5th June , 1972(w.e.f. 1-8-1972) 
228. Added by S.O. 2139, dated 5th June , 1972(w.e.f. 1-8-1972) 
229. Subs. by G.S.R. 926, dated 24th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16-7-1977). 
230. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
231. Ins. by G.S.R. 923(E), dated 14th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 14-12-1992). 
232. The words "or Renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
233. The words "or renewed, as the case may be" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 
(w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
234. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
235. 
Clause (iii) omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). Clause (iii), 
before omission stood as under: 
"(iii) in case the application is for the renewal of licence, call for the information(s) of the past 
performance of the licensee.". 
236. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
237. The words "or renewed" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
238. The words "or renew" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
239. Ins. by G.S.R. 89(E), dated 14th February, 1996 (w.e.f. 14-2-1996). 
240. Subs. By notification No. F. 1-22/59-D, dated 9th April, 1960. 
241. Subs, by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
242. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
243. Subs, by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
244. Subs, by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
245. The words "or for the purpose of renewal of licences" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 
2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
246. Subs. By. G.S.R. 640(E) dated 29 th June, 2016, for “categorised in Schedule M and Schedule M -III” 
(w.e.f. 29-62016) 
247. 
Sub-rule (3) omitted by G.S.R. 1337 (E) dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier sub-rule 
(3) was amended by G.S.R. 60 1(E) dated 24 th August, 2001(w.e.f. 24 -8-2001). Sub -rule (3), before 
omission, stood as under: 
“ (3) If a person applies for the renewal of a licence after the expiry thereof but within six months of 
such expiry the fee payable for the renewal of such licence shall be− 
(i) in the case of Form 24B a licence fee of rupees five hundred plus an additional fee at the rate of 
rupees two hundred and fifty per month or part thereof in addition to an inspection fee of rupees two 
hundred; 
(ii) in the case of Form 2 4F a licence fee of rupees six thousand plus an additional fee at the rate of 
rupees one thousand per month or part thereof in addition to an inspection fee of rupees one thousand; 
(iii) in the case of Form 24 a licence fee of rupees six thousand plus an additional fee at the rate of 
rupees one thousand per month or part thereof in addition to an inspection fee of rupees one thousand 
and five hundred.” 
248. Subs, by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
249. Subs, by G.S.R. 26(E), dated 19th January, 2006 (w.e.f. 19-1-2006). 
250. 
Subs. By. G.S.R. 640(E) dated 29 th June, 2016, for “categorised in Schedule M and Schedule M -III” 
(w.e.f. 29-62016) 
251. Ins. By G.S.R. 311(E) dated 1st May, 2002 (w.e.f. 1-5-2002). 
252. Amended by Notification No. F.1-16/57-D, dated 15th June, 1957. 
253. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
254. 
Proviso omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E) dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Proviso , before 
omission , stood as under: 
“Provided that if the applicant applies for the renewal of a licence after its expiry but within six months 
of such expiry, the fee payable for renewal of such licence shall be accompanied by a licence fee of 
rupees six thousand and an inspection fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred plus an a dditional 
fee at the rate of rupees one thousand per month or part thereof.” 
255. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 724(E), dated 7th November, 2013 (w.e.f. 7 -11-2013). For Explanation (w.e.f. 7-11-
2013). Explanation, before substitution, stood as under: 
“Explanation.- For the purpose of this rule a loan licence means a licence which the Licensing 
Authority may issue to an applicant who does not have his own arrangements for manufacture but who 
intends to avail himself of the manufacturing facilities owned by a licensee in Form 25.” 
256. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
257. 
Subs. By. G.S.R. 640(E) dated 29 th June, 2016, for “categorised in Schedule M and Sch edule M-III” 
(w.e.f. 29-62016) 
258. Added by Notification no. F.1-20/64-D, dated 26th October, 1968 (w.e.f. 2-11-1968). 
259. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for certain words (w.e.f. 24-8-2001).Earlier it was 
substituted by G.S.R. 779(E) dated 18 th July, 1980(w.e.f. 26-7-1980) 
260. 
Rule 69B omitted by G.S.R. 944(E) dated 21 st September, 1988 (w.e.f. 21 -9-1988). Earlier rule 69B 
was inserted by Notification No. F.1-19/59-D, dated 13th June , 1961 
261. Subs, by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
262. 
Added by Notification No.F.1-16/57-D, dated 15th June, 1957 and Notification No. F. 1-22/59-D, dated 
9th April, 1960. 
263. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
264. Subs. By Notification No. F.1-16/57-D, dated 15th June, 1957. 
265. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
266. The words "or renewed" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
267. Subs. by G.S.R. 71(E), dated 30th January, 1987 (w.e.f. 30-1-1987). 
268. Added by Notification No. F.1-19/59-D (S.O. 1449), dated 13th June , 1961 (w.e.f. 24-06-1961) 
269. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
270. Subs. by G.S.R. 93(E), dated 24th February, 1995 (w.e.f. 24-2-1995). 
271. Added by Notification No. F. 1-14/68-D, dated 26th October, 1968. 
272. Subs. by G.S.R. 93(E), dated 24th February, 1995 (w.e.f. 24-2-1995). 
273. Subs, by G.S.R. 926(E), dated 24th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16-7-1977). 
274. 
These rules came into force on 28th May, 1977 vide G.S.R. 665, dated 6 th May, 1977 (w.e.f. 28 -5-
1977). 
275. Ins. by G.S.R. 1172 (E), dated 23rd August, 1977. 
276. Ins. By G.S.R. 681(E) dated 5th December , 1980 (w.e.f. 5-12-1980) 
277. Added by G.S.R. 515(E), dated 24th March , 1976 (w.e.f. 10-4-1976) 
278. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 360(E), dated 10th April, 2018 for "patent or proprietary medicines" (w.e.f. 10 -4-
2018). 
279. Ins. By G.S.R. 311(E) dated 1st May, 2002 (w.e.f. 1-5-2002). 
280. Ins. By G.S.R. 735(E) dated 24th June, 1988 (w.e.f. 24-6-1988). 
281. Ins. by G.S.R. 570(E), dated 7th August, 2014 (w.e.f. 7-8-2014). 
282. Ins. by G.S.R. 828(E) dated 6th November, 2019 (w.e.f. 6-11-2019) 
283. Added by Notification No. F. 1-22/59-D, dated 9th April, 1960. 
284. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
285. The words "or renewed" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
286. Subs. by S.O. 2139, dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
287. Subs. by G.S.R. 926, dated 24th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16-7-1977). 
288. 
The rules came into force on 16 th July, 1977 vide G.S.R. 926(E) dated 24 th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16 -7-
1977) 
289. Ins. by G.S.R. 1172 (E), dated 23rd August, 1977. 
290. Added by G.S.R. 515(E), dated 24th March , 1976 (w.e.f. 10-4-1976) 
291. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
292. The words "or renewed" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
293. 
Subs, by G .S.R. 360(E), dated 10th April, 2018 for "patent or proprietary medicines" (w.e.f. 10 -4-
2018). 
294. Ins. by G.S.R. 828(E) dated 6th November, 2019 (w.e.f. 6-11-2019) 
295. Ins. by G.S.R. 570(E), dated 7th August, 2014 (w.e.f. 7-8-2014). 
296. 
Subs. By G.S.R. 1337(E) dated 27 th October, 2017, for rule 72 (w.e.f.. 27-10-2017). Earlier rule 72 was 
amended by Notification No. F.1 -10/62-D (S.O. 1326 (E)), dated 10 th April, 1964 (w. e.f. 11-4-1964), 
by S.O. 2139, dated 5 th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1972), by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22 nd June, 1982(w.e.f. 
22-6-1982) and by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24 th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
297. 
Rule 73 omitted by G.S.R. 1 337(E) dated 27 th October, 2017, (w.e.f.. 27 -10-2017).Earlier it was 
amended by G.S.R. 462(E) dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
298. 
Rule 73A omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E) dated 27 th October, 2017, (w.e.f.. 27 -10-2017). Earlier rule 73A 
was amended by Notification No. F.1-10/62-D (S.O. 1326(E), dated 10th April,1964, w.e.f. 11-4-1964.) 
299. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E) dated 27 th October, 2017, for rule 73AA (w.e.f.. 27 -10-2017). Earlier rule 
73AA was amended by S.O. 2139, dated 5 th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972) and by G.S.R. 601(E) dated 
24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001) 
300. Ins. By G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
301. Rule 73B omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier rule 73B 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
added by S.O. 1196(E) dated 6th May, 1960 (w.e.f. 14-5-1960). 
302. Subs. By Notification No. F. 1-20/64-D (S.O. 3868(E) dated 26th October, 1968 (w.e.f. 2-11-1968)) 
303. Subs. By G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
304. Ins. by G.S.R. 1172 (E), dated 23rd August, 1977. 
305. Subs. By G.S.R. 444(E) dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973) 
306. Subs. By G.S.R. 444(E) dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973) 
307. Subs. By G.S.R. 444(E) dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973) 
308. Ins. By G.S.R. 444(E) dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973) 
309. Subs. By G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
310. Ins. By G.S.R. 735(E) dated 24th June, 1988 (w.e.f. 24-6-1988). 
311. Ins. by G.S.R 780(E), dated 10th November, 2008 (w.e.f. 1-11-2010). 
312. Ins. by G.S.R 289(E), dated 15th April, 2015 (w.e.f. 15-4-2015). 
313. Ins. By G.S.R. 327(E), dated 3rd April, 2017 (w.e.f. 3-4-2017). 
314. Added by S.O. 1196, dated 6th May, 1960 (w.e.f. 14-5-1960). 
315. Ins. by G.S.R. 1172, dated 23rd August, 1977 (w.e.f. 10-9-1977). 
316. Subs. By Notification No. F. 1-20/64-D (S.O. 3868(E) dated 26th October, 1968 (w.e.f. 2-11-1968)) 
317. Subs. By G.S.R. 444(E) dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973) 
318. Subs. By Notification No. F. 1-20/64-D (S.O. 3868(E) dated 26th October, 1968 (w.e.f. 2-11-1968)) 
319. Added by Notification No. F. 1-20/64-D (S.O. 3868(E) dated 26th October, 1968 (w.e.f. 2-11-1968)) 
320. Added by G.S.R. 444(E) dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973). 
321. Ins. by G.S.R. 289(E), dated 15th April, 2015 (w.e.f. 15-4-2015). 
322. Added by Notification No. F. 1-20/64-D (S.O. 3868(E) dated 26th October, 1968 (w.e.f. 2-11-1968)) 
323. Ins. by G.S.R. 1172, dated 23rd August, 1977 (w.e.f. 10-9-1977). 
324. Ins. by G.S.R. 444(E) dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973). 
325. Ins. by G.S.R. 331(E), dated 8th May, 1984 (w.e.f. 8-5-1984). 
326. Ins. by G.S.R. 289(E), dated 15th April, 2015 (w.e.f. 15-4-2015). 
327. Ins. By G.S.R. 327(E), dated 3rd April, 2017 (w.e.f. 3-4-2017). 
328. Subs. By G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
329. Ins. by G.S.R. 28(E), dated 22nd January, 1993 (w.e.f. 22-1-1993). 
330. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
331. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
332. 
Subs. By. G.S.R. 640(E) dated 29 th June, 2016, for “categorised in Schedule M and Schedule M -III” 
(w.e.f. 29-62016) 
333. 
The words “or for the purpose of renewal of licences” omitted by G.S.R. 1337 (E) dated 27th October, 
2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
334. 
Proviso omitted by G.S.R. 1337 (E) dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier proviso was 
amended by G.S.R. 601(E) dated 24th August, 2001(w.e.f. 24-8-2001) 
335. 
Ins. by G.S.R. 119(E), dated 11th March, 1996 (w.e.f. 11 -3-1996) as corrected by G.S.R. 513(E) dated 
6th November, 1996. 
336. Subs, by G.S.R. 26(E), dated 19th January, 2006 (w.e.f. 19-1-2006). 
337. Sub. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
338. 
The words “or for the purpose of renewal of licences” omitted by G.S.R. 1337 (E) dated 27th October, 
2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
339. 
Proviso omitted by G.S.R. 1337 (E) dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier proviso was 
amended by G.S.R. 601(E) dated 24th August, 2001(w.e.f. 24-8-2001) 
340. 
Sub. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for sub -rules (4) and (5) (w.e.f. 24 -8-2001). Earlier 
sub-rules (3) and (4) were re -numbered as sub -rules (4) and (5) respectively by G.S.R. 119(E) dated 
11th March, 1996 (w.e.f. 11-3-1996) 
341. 
Subs. By. G.S.R. 640(E) dated 29 th June, 2016, for “categorised in Schedule M and Schedule M -III” 
(w.e.f. 29-62016) 
342. 
Subs. By G.S.R. 654(E) dated 24 -08-2022 (w.e.f. 24-08-2022). Earlier Ins. By G.S.R. 311(E) dated 1 st 
May, 2002 (w.e.f. 1-5-2002). Before substitution clause (6) stood as under: 
“[(6) Where an application under this rule is for the manufacture of drug formulations falling under the 
purview of new drug as defined in rule 122E, such application shall also be accompanied with 
approval, in writing, in favour of the applicant, from the licensing authority as defined in clause (b) or 
rule 21.]” 
343. Added by Notification No. F.1-16/57-D, dated 15th June, 1957. 
344. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
345. Subs, by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
346. Subs. by G.S.R. 28(E), dated 22nd January, 1993 (w.e.f. 22-1-1993). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
347. 
Proviso omitted by G.S.R. 1337 (E) dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier proviso was 
amended by S.O. 2139(E) dated 5 th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1972). Proviso, before omission, stood as 
under: 
“Provided that if the applicant applies for the renewal of a licence after its expiry but within six months 
of such expiry the fee payable for renewal of the licence shall be rupees six thousand and an inspection 
of fee of rupees one thousand and five hundred plus an a dditional fee at the rate of rupees one thousand 
per month or a part thereof.” 
348. 
Ins. by G.S.R. 724(E), dated 7th November, 2013 (w.e.f. 7 -11-2013). Explanation, before substitution , 
stood as under: 
“Explanation. − For the purpose of this rule a loan licence means a licence which a licensing authority 
may issue to an applicant who does not have his own arrangements for manufacture but who intends to 
avail himself of the manufacturing facilities owned by another licensee in Form 28 and Form 28D.” 
349. Ins. by G.S.R. 574(E), dated 17th July, 2012, for "Form 28A" (w.e.f. 17-7-2012). 
350. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
351. 
The words “or for the purpose of renewal of licences” omitted by G.S.R. 1337 (E) dated 27th October, 
2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
352. 
Proviso omitted by G.S.R. 1337 (E) dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Proviso, before 
omission, stood as under: 
“Provided that if the application for the renewal of a licence is made after its expiry but within six 
months of such expiry, the fee payable for renewal of the licence shall be rupees six thousand plus an 
additional fee of one thousand rupees per month or a part thereof in addition to the inspection fee of 
one thousand and five hundred rupees.” 
353. 
Proviso omitted by G.S.R. 574(E), dated 17 th July, 2012, for "F orm 28A" (w.e.f. 17 -7-2012).Earlier it 
was inserted by G.S.R. 592(E) dated 13 th August, 2008(w.e.f.13 -8-2008). Proviso before omission, 
stood as under: 
“Provided that if an item is a notified drug under rule 68A, the manufacturing unit undertaking 
manufacture on behalf of the loan licencee shall have a valid manufacturing licence approved by the 
Licensing Authority and its manufacture on loan licence shall not affect the quality of the drug.” 
354. Subs, by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (S.O. 1449(E)) (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
355. 
Rules 75B omitted by G.S.R. 944(E), dated 21st September, 1988 (w.e.f. 21 -9-1988). Earlier rule 75B 
was added by Notification No. F.1-19/59-D (S.O. 1449), dated 13th June, 1961 (w.e.f. 24-6-1961). 
356. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
357. Ins. by G.S.R. 28(E), dated 22nd January, 1993 (w.e.f. 22-1-1993). 
358. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
359. Subs, by G.S.R. 119(E), dated 11th March, 1996 (w.e.f. 11-3-1996). 
360. Subs, by G.S.R. 26(E), dated 19th January, 2006 (w.e.f. 19-1-2006). 
361. The words "or renewed" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
362. Subs, by G.S.R. 71(E), dated 30th January, 1987 (w.e.f. 30-1-1987). 
363. Ins. By G.S.R. 245(E) dated 3rd February, 1976 (w.e.f. 21-2-1976) 
364. Subs. by G.S.R. 71(E), dated 30th January, 1987 (w.e.f. 30-1-1987). 
365. Added by Notification No. F.1-19/59-D (S.O. 1449), dated 13th June , 1967 (w.e.f. 20-06-1967) 
366. Added by Notification No. F. 1-6/62-D (S.O. 2889), dated 2nd July, 1969 (w.e.f. 19-7-1969). 
367. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 690(E), dated 25th September, 2014, for third proviso (w.e.f. 25 -9-2014). Earlier third 
proviso was inserted by G.S.R. 109(E), dated 22 nd February, 1994 (w.e.f. 22 -2-1994). Third proviso, 
before substitution by G.S.R. 690(E) dated 25 th September, 2014, stood as under: 
“Provided further also that for the medical devices specified in Schedule C, the whole time 
employee under whose supervision the manufacture is conducted may be a Graduate in Science 
with Physics or Chemistry or Microbiology as one of the subjects; or graduate in Pharmacy; or 
Degree/Diploma holder in Mechanical or Chemical or Plastic Engineering of a University 
recognized by the Central government for such purposes.” 
368. 
Conditions (2), (2A) and (3) subs, by G .S.R. 640(E), dated 29 th June, 2016, for Conditions (2) and (3). 
Conditions (2) and (3), before substitution, stood as under: 
"(2) The factory premises shall comply with the conditions prescribed in Schedule M and Schedule M 
III in the respect of Medical devices. 
(3) The applicant shall provide adequate space, plant and equipment for any or all the manufacturing 
operations; the space, plant and equipment recommended for various operations are given in Schedule 
M and Schedule M III." 
369. Subs, by G.S.R. 926(E), dated 24th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16-7-1977). 
370. 
These rules came into force on 28 th May, 1977 vide G.S.R. 665(E), dated 6 th May, 1977 (w.e.f. 28 -5-
1977). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
371. Ins. by G.S.R. 1172(E), dated 23rd August, 1977. 
372. Ins. By G.S.R. 681(E) dated 5th December , 1980 (w.e.f. 5-12-1980) 
373. Ins. by G.S.R. 444(E), dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973). 
374. Added by G.S.R. 515(E), dated 24th March , 1976 (w.e.f. 10-4-1976) 
375. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 360(E), dated 10th April, 2018 for "patent or proprietary medicines" (w.e.f. 10 -4-
2018). 
376. Ins. By G.S.R. 311(E) dated 1st May, 2002 (w.e.f. 1-5-2002). 
377. 
Subs. By G.S.R. 640(E) dated 29 th June, 2016, for Condition (8) (w.e.f. 29 -6-2016). Earlier condition 
(8) was inserted by G.S.R. 735(E) dated 24 th June, 1988 (w.e.f . 24 -6-1988). Condition (8), before 
substitution, stood as under: 
“(8) The Licence shall comply, with the requirements of “Good Manufacturing Practices” as laid down 
in Schedule M.” 
378. Ins. by G.S.R. 570(E), dated 7th August, 2014 (w.e.f. 7-8-2014). 
379. Ins. by G.S.R. 119(E), dated 11th March, 1996 (w.e.f. 11-3-1996) 
380. Subs, by G.S.R. 26(E), dated 19th January, 2006 (w.e.f. 19-1-2006). 
381. Ins. by G.S.R. 327(E), dated 3rd April, 2017 (w.e.f. 3-4-2017). 
382. Ins. by G.S.R. 828(E) dated 6th November, 2019 (w.e.f. 6-11-2019) 
383. Subs. By G.S.R. 574(E), dated 17th July, 2012, for " " (w.e.f. 17-7-2012). 
384. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
385. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 360(E), dated 10th April, 2018 for "patent or proprietary medic ines" (w.e.f. 10 -4-
2018). 
386. Ins. by G.S.R. 828(E) dated 6th November, 2019 (w.e.f. 6-11-2019) 
387. Ins. by G.S.R. 570(E), dated 7th August, 2014 (w.e.f. 7-8-2014). 
388. 
Ins. by G.S.R. 499(E), dated 17 th July, 2019 (w.e.f. 17 -7-2019). Earlier rule 77 was omitted by G.S.R. 
1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017) and earlier to that rule 77 was amended by 
Notification No. E.1 -10/62-D (S.O. 1326(E)), dated 10 th April, 1964 (w.e.f. 11 -4-1964), by S.O. 
2139(E) dated 5 th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1972), by G.S.R. 119(E), dated 11 th March, 1996 (w.e.f. 11-
3-1996) and by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
389. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-6/62-D (S.O. 2889), dated 2nd July, 1969 (w.e.f. 19-7-1969). 
390. Subs. By G.S.R. 119(E), dated 11th March, 1996 (w.e.f. 11-3-1996). 
391. Subs. by Notification No. F.1-16/57-D (S.O. 2136(E)), dated 15th June, 1957. 
392. Subs. by Notification no. F.1-20/64-D (S.O. 3868(E)), dated 26th October, 1968 (w.e.f. 2-11-1968). 
393. Ins. by G.S.R. 1172 (E), dated 23rd August, 1977. 
394. Subs. By G.S.R. 444(E) dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973) 
395. Subs. By G.S.R. 444(E) dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973) 
396. Subs. by Notification No. F.1-16/57-D, dated 15th June, 1957. 
397. Subs. By G.S.R. 444(E) dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973) 
398. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-14/68-D (S.O. 3868(E)), dated 26th October, 1968 (w.e.f. 2-11-1968). 
399. Added by G.S.R. 444(E) dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973) 
400. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
401. Ins. By G.S.R. 735(E) dated 24th June, 1988 (w.e.f. 24-6-1988). 
402. Ins. by G.S.R 780(E), dated 10th November, 2008 (w.e.f. 1-11-2010). 
403. Ins. by G.S.R 289(E), dated 15th April, 2015 (w.e.f. 15-4-2015). 
404. Ins. By G.S.R. 327(E), dated 3rd April, 2017 (w.e.f. 3-4-2017). 
405. Added by Notification No. F. 1-14/68-D (S.O. 3868(E)), dated 26th October, 1968 (w.e.f. 2-11-1968). 
406. Ins. by G.S.R. 574(E), dated 17th July, 2012, for "Form 28A" (w.e.f. 17-7-2012). 
407. Subs. by G.S.R. 592(E), dated 13th August, 2008, for "Form 28" (w.e.f. 13-8-2008). 
408. Subs. by G.S.R. 574(E), dated 17th July, 2012, for "Form 28" (w.e.f. 17-7-2012). 
409. Added by G.S.R. 444(E) dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973) 
410. Subs. by G.S.R. 574(E), dated 17th July, 2012, for "Form 28" (w.e.f. 17 -7-2012). 
411. Ins. by G.S.R. 331(E), dated 8th May, 1984 (w.e.f. 8-5-1984). 
412. Ins. by G.S.R 289(E), dated 15th April, 2015 (w.e.f. 15-4-2015). 
413. Ins. By G.S.R. 327(E), dated 3rd April, 2017 (w.e.f. 3-4-2017). 
414. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 923(E), dated 14 th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1992), as corrected by G.S.R. 
373(E), dated 13th April, 1993. 
415. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
416. The words "or renewed" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
417. Ins. by G.S.R. 923(E), dated 14th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 14-12-1992) 
418. Subs. By G.S.R. 119(E), dated 11th March, 1996 (w.e.f. 11-3-1996). 
419. Subs. by Notification No. F.1-16/57-D, dated 15th June, 1957. 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
420. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for " fee of rupees fifty" (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
421. Ins. by G.S.R. 923(E), dated 14th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 14-12-1992) 
422. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
423. 
Ins. by G.S.R. 499(E), dated 17th July, 2019 (w.e.f. 17 -7-2019). Earlier rule 83 was omitted by G.S.R. 
1337(E) dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier to that rule 83 was amended by 
Notification No. F.1-16/57-D, dated 15th June, 1957. 
424. 
Rule 83A omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E) dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier rule 83A 
was added by Notification No. F.1 -16/57-D, dated 15 th June, 1957 and amended by G.S.R. 574(E) 
dated 17th July, 2012 (w.e.f. 17-7-2012). Rule 83A, before omission , stood as under: 
“83A. Certificate of renewal of a loan licence .−The certificate of renewal of a loan licence in Form 
28A or Form 28DA shall be issued in Form 26A or Form 26J respectively.” 
425. 
Rule 83AA omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E) dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).Earlier rule 83AA 
was added by Notification No. F. 1 -10/62-D (S.O. 1326(E)), dated 10 th April, 1964 (w.e.f. 11 -4-1964) 
and amended by S.O. 2139(E), dated 5 th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1972), by G.S.R. 601(E) dated 24th 
August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001) and by G.S.R. 574(E), dated 17th July, 2012, (w.e.f. 17 -7-2012). Rule 
83AA, before omission , stood as under: 
“83-AA. Duration of loan licence.− An original loan licence in Form 28A or Form 28DA or a renewed 
loan licence in Form 26A or Form 26J, unless sooner suspended or cancelled, shall be valid for a 
period of five years on and from the date on which it is granted or renewed: 
 Provided that if the application for the renewal of a licence is made before its expiry, or if the 
application is made within six months of its expiry, after payment of the additional fee, the licence 
shall continue to be in force unt il orders are passed on the application and the licence shall be deemed 
to have expired if the application for its renewal is not made within six months of its expiry.” 
426. Added by S.O. 2139, dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
427. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 923(E), dated 14 th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1992), as corrected by G.S.R. 
373(E), dated 13th April, 1993. 
428. The words "or renewed" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
429. The words "or renew" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
430. Subs. By G.S.R. 119(E), dated 11th March, 1996 (w.e.f. 11-3-1996). 
431. Added by S.O. 2139, dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
432. Ins. By G.S.R. 19(E) dated 10th January, 2019 (w.e.f. 10-1-2019). 
433. Added by S.O. 2358(E) dated 21st June, 1972 (w.e.f. 26-8-1972). 
434. Ins. By G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
435. Ins. by G.S.R. 101(E), dated 11th February, 2020 (w.e.f. 1-3-2021). 
436. Ins. by G.S.R. 101(E), dated 11th February, 2020 (w.e.f. 1-3-2021). 
437. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 923(E), dated 14 th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1992), as corrected by G.S.R. 
373(E), dated 13th April, 1993. 
438. Ins. By G.S.R. 20(E) dated 11th January, 1996 (w.e.f. 11-1-1996). 
439. Corrected vide Corrigendum G.S.R. 514(E), dated 5th November, 1996. 
440. The words "or renewed" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
441. 
Ins. By G.S.R. 615(E) dated 9 th August, 1994 (w.e.f. 9 -8-1994), as corrected by G.S.R. 1185(E) dated 
11th August, 1964 (w.e.f. 22-8-1964) 
442. 
Part VIIA (containing rules 85A to 85E, 85F and 85 -I) added by G.S.R. 1185(E) dated 11 th August, 
1964 (w.e.f. 22-8-1964) 
443. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
444. Subs. By G.S.R. 245(E) dated 3rd February, 1976 (w.e.f. 21-2-1976) or (w.e.f. 11-2-1976) 
445. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2001). Earlier these words were 
substituted by G.S.R. 779(E) dated 18th July, 1980 (w.e.f. 26-7-1980). 
446. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2001). Earlier these words were 
substituted by G.S.R. 779(E) dated 18 th July, 1980 (w.e.f. 26-7-1980). 
447. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2001). Earlier these words were 
substituted by G.S.R. 779(E) dated 18 th July, 1980 (w.e.f. 26-7-1980). 
448. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th A ugust, 2001 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2001). Earlier these words were 
substituted by G.S.R. 779(E) dated 18 th July, 1980 (w.e.f. 26-7-1980). 
449. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2001). Earlier these words were 
substituted by G.S.R. 779(E) dated 18 th July, 1980 (w.e.f. 26-7-1980). 
450. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2001). Earlier these words were 
substituted by G.S.R. 779(E) dated 18 th July, 1980 (w.e.f. 26-7-1980). 
451. Subs. By G.S.R. 779(E) dated 18th July, 1980 (w.e.f. 26-7-1980). 
452. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for “rupees five” (w.e.f. 24 -8-2001). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
453. Ins. By G.S.R. 13(E) dated 7th January, 1983 (w.e.f. 7-1-1983) 
454. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-59/68-D (S.O. 4816), dated 19th November , 1969 (w.e.f. 6-12-1969). 
455. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 812(E), dated 14th November, 1994 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994) as corrected by G.S.R. 517(E), 
dated 26th June, 1995. 
456. Subs. by G.S.R. 570(E), dated 12th June, 1987 (w.e.f. 12-6-1987). 
457. Ins. by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017 (w.e.f. 10-11-2017). 
458. Ins. by G.S.R. 1172(E), dated 23rd August, 1977(w.e.f. 10-9-1977). 
459. Ins. by Notification No. F. 1-59/68-D (S.O. 4816), dated 19th November , 1969 (w.e.f. 6-12-1969). 
460. 
Ins. by G.S.R. 493(E), dated 9 th June, 1995 (w.e.f. 9-6-1995), as corrected by G.S.R. 184(E), dated 12 th 
April, 1996. 
461. 
Ins. by G.S.R. 493(E), dated 9 th June, 1995 (w.e.f. 9-6-1995), as corrected by G.S.R. 184(E), dated 12 th 
April, 1996. 
462. 
Ins. by G.S.R. 493(E), dated 9 th June, 1995 (w.e.f. 9-6-1995), as corrected by G.S.R. 184(E), dated 12 th 
April, 1996. 
463. 
Ins. by G.S.R. 493(E), dated 9 th June, 1995 (w.e.f. 9-6-1995), as corrected by G.S.R. 184(E), dated 12 th 
April, 1996. 
464. 
Ins. by G.S.R. 493(E), dated 9 th June, 1995 (w.e.f. 9-6-1995), as corrected by G.S.R. 184(E), dated 12 th 
April, 1996. 
465. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
466. Subs. By S.O. 2139(E) dated 5th June 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
467. Subs. by G.S.R. 444, dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973). 
468. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-14/68-D, dated 26th October, 1968 (w.e.f. 2-11-1968). 
469. Ins. By G.S.R. 13(E) dated 7th January, 1983 (w.e.f. 7-1-1983) 
470. Ins. by G.S.R. 680(E), dated 5th December, 1980 (w.e.f. 5-12-1980). 
471. Added by S.O. 2139, dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
472. Subs. by G.S.R. 926(E), dated 24th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16-7-1977). 
473. Added by Notification No. F.1-19/59-D (S.O. 1449), dated 13th June, 1961 (w.e.f. 24-6-1961). 
474. Rule 90 re-numbered as sub-rule (1) thereof by S.O. 903, dated 10th February, 1976 (w.e.f. 28-2-1976). 
475. Added by S.O. 903(E), dated 10th February, 1976 (w.e.f. 28-2-1976). 
476. Subs. by G.S.R. 766(E), dated 27th October, 2021, for "Form 29" (w.e.f. 27-10-2021). 
477. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
478. Ins. by G.S.R. 766(E), dated 27th October, 2021 (w.e.f. 27-10-2021). 
479. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 103(E), dated 2 nd February, 2017, for "one year from the date of issue" (w.e.f. 2 -2-
2017). 
480. Subs. by G.S.R. 444, dated 31st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973). 
481. Subs. By Notification No. F.1-10/68-D(S.O. 2482(E)) dated 17th June, 1969 (w.e.f. 28-6-1969). 
482. Ins. By G.S.R. 676(E) dated 2nd June, 1988 (w.e.f. 2-6-1988). 
483. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 592(E), dated 13 th August, 2008, for “blood p roducts, Narcotic and Psychotropic 
Substances” (w.e.f. 13-8-2008). 
484. Ins. by G.S.R. 592(E), dated 13th August, 2008 (w.e.f. 13-8-2008). 
485. Subs. by Notification No. F.1-19/59-D (S.O. 1449), dated 13th June , 1961 (w.e.f. 24-06-1961) 
486. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
487. Ins. By G.S.R. 19(E) dated 15th December, 1977 (w.e.f. 7-1-1978). 
488. 
Subs. By G.S.R. 222(E) dated 13 th March, 2018, for certain words (w.e.f. 13 -9-2018). Earlier these 
words were amended by G.S.R. 27(E) dated 17 th January, 1981(w.e.f. 17 -1-1981). The words before 
substitution, stood as under: 
“(A) For this purp ose, the proper name of the drug shall be printed or written in a more conspicuous 
manner than the trade name, if any, which shall be shown immediately after or under the proper name 
and shall be”. 
489. The words “in same font but” omitted by G.S.R. 1161(E) dated 3rd December, 2018 (w.e.f. 3-12-2018). 
490. The words “in brackets” omitted by G.S.R. 205(E) dated 8 th March, 2019 (w.e.f. 8-3-2019). 
491. 
Sub-clause (E) omitted by G.S.R. 94(E) dated 8 th February, 2000 (w.e.f. 8 -2-2000). Earlier sub -clause 
(E) was inserted by G.S.R. 27(E) dated 17th January, 1981 (w.e.f. 17-1-1981) 
492. Ins. by G.S.R. 1161(E) dated 3rd December, 2018 (w.e.f. 3-12-2018). 
493. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 285(E) dated 16 th July, 1996 (w.e.f. 16-7-1996). 
494. Ins. By G.S.R. 681(E) dated 5th December , 1980 (w.e.f. 5-12-1980). 
495. Ins. by G.S.R. 285(E) dated 16th July, 1996 (w.e.f. 16-7-1996). 
496. Subs. By G.S.R. 491(E) dated 25th July, 1991(w.e.f. 25-7-1991). 
497. Subs. By G.S.R. 17(E) dated 7th January 1986 (w.e.f.7-1-1986). 
498. Subs. By G.S.R. 17(E) dated 7th January 1986 (w.e.f.7-1-1986). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
499. Ins. by G.S.R. 285(E) dated 16th July, 1996 (w.e.f. 16-7-1996). 
500. Subs. by G.S.R. 592(E), dated 13th August, 2008 (w.e.f. 13-8-2008). 
501. Subs. by G.S.R. 813(E), dated 27th July, 1988 (w.e.f. 27-7-1988). 
502. Ins. by G.S.R. 426(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
503. Ins. by G.S.R. 597(E), dated 17th June, 1992 (w.e.f. 17-12-1992). 
504. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 408(E), dated 26th April, 2018, for "In addition to the other particulars which are 
required to be printed or written under these rules, the label of innermost container of the following 
categories of drugs and every other covering in which the container is packed shall bear a conspicuous 
red vertical line on the left side running throughout the body of the label which should not be less th an 
1 mm in width and without disturbing the other conditions printed on the label under these rules, 
namely:— 
Narcotic analgesics, hypnotics, sedatives, tranquillisers, corticosteriods, hormones, hypoglycemics, 
antimicrobials, antiepileptics, antidepressan ts, anticoagulants, anti -Cancer drugs and all other drugs 
falling under Schedules G, H and X whether covered or not in the above list:" (w.e.f. 1 -11-2018). 
505. Subs. by G.S.R. 408(E), dated 26th April, 2018, for “Provided that” (w.e.f. 1-11-2018). 
506. Ins.. by G.S.R. 592(E), dated 13th August, 2008 (w.e.f. 13-8-2008). 
507. Ins. by G.S.R. 101(E), dated 11th February, 2020 (w.e.f. 1-3-2021). 
508. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
509. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 408(E), dated 26th April, 2018, for clauses (a) to (e) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2018).Earlier it was 
amended by G.S.R. 282(E), dated 16 th july, 1996 (w.e .f. 16 -7-1996), as corrected by G.S.R. 241(E), 
dated 15th April, 1998, by G.S.R. 588(E), dated 30th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27-2-2014). 
510. Ins. by G.S.R. 850(E), dated 7th December, 1994 (w.e.f. 7-12-1994). 
511. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-6/62-D (S.O. 2889), dated 2nd July, 1969 (w.e.f. 19-7-1969). 
512. Ins. by G.S.R. 128(E), dated 17th January, 2012 (w.e.f. 17-1-2012). 
513. 
Sub-rule (4) omitte d and sub -rule (5) renumbered as sub -rule (4) by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22 nd June, 
1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
514. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
515. Ins. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 20th March, 2019 (w.e.f. 20-3-2019). 
516. Rules 98 to 101 omitted by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22 nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
517. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-3/51-D.S., dated 15th October, 1954. 
518. Sub-rule (1) omitted by Notification No. F. 116/57-D (S.O. 2136), dated 15th June, 1957. 
519. Subs. by Notification No. F-1-16/57-D (S.O. 2136), dated 15th June, 1957. 
520. Subs. by G.S.R. 19, dated 15th December, 1977 (w.e.f. 7-1-1978). 
521. Ins. by G.S.R. 1242(E) dated 17th September, 1976 (w.e.f. 6-10-1979). 
522. Subs. by G.S.R. 796(E), dated 1st October, 1992 (w.e.f. 1-10-1993). 
523. Subs. by G.S.R. 558(E), dated 17th July, 2015, for “Provided also that” (w.e.f. 17-7-2015). 
524. Ins. by G.S.R. 242(E), dated 3rd April, 2001 (w.e.f. 3-4-2001). 
525. Subs. by G.S.R. 558(E), dated 17th July, 2015, for “Provided further that” (w.e.f. 17-7-2015). 
526. Ins. by G.S.R. 558(E), dated 17th July, 2015 (w.e.f. 17-7-2015). 
527. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
528. Subs. by Notification No. F. 16-/52-DS (S.O. 2122), dated 22nd June, 1954. 
529. Explanation omitted by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22 nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
530. Part IXA Containing rules 106A ins. by G.S.R. 1185, dated 18 th August, 1964 (w.e.f. 22-8-1964). 
531. Subs, by G.S.R. 680(E), dated 5th December, 1980 (w.e.f. 5-12-1980). 
532. Subs. by G.S.R. 466(E), dated 17th May, 1994 (w.e.f. 17-5-1994). 
533. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-59/68-D, dated 19th November, 1969. 
534. Ins. by G.S.R. 263(E), dated 20th April, 2009 (w.e.f. 20-4-2009). 
535. Subs. by G.S.R. 108(E), dated 22nd February, 1994 (w.e.f. 22-2-1994). 
536. Added, by S.O. 2139, dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
537. Ins. by G.S.R. 108(E), dated 22nd February, 1994 (w.e.f. 22-2-1994). 
538. Subs. by Notification No. F-1-5/47-D (S.O. 2889), dated 25th November, 1949. 
539. Subs. by Notification No. F-1-6/62-D, dated 2nd July, 1969 (w.e.f. 02.07.1969). 
540. Subs. by G.S.R. 647(E), dated 28th October, 1998 (w.e.f. 28-10-1998). 
541. Subs. by G.S.R. 245(E) dated 3rd February, 1976 (w.e.f. 21-2-1976) 
542. Ins. by S.O. 115(E), dated 4th January, 1961 (w.e.f. 14-1-1961). 
543. Subs. by Notification No. F-1-6/62-D (S.O. 2889), dated 2nd July, 1969 (w.e.f. 02.07.1969). 
544. Subs. by Notification No. F-1-6/62-D (S.O. 2889), dated 2nd July, 1969 (w.e.f. 02.07.1969). 
545. Subs. by G.S.R. 19(E), dated 15th December, 1977 (w.e.f. 7-1-1978). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
546. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 690(E), dated 25th September, 2014, for rule 109A (w.e.f. 25 -9-2014). Earlier rule 
109A was inserted by G.S.R. 109(E), dated 22 nd February, 1994 (w.e.f. 22-2-1994). 
547. Ins. by G.S.R. 690(E), dated 25th September, 2014 (w.e.f. 25-9-2014). 
548. Ins. by G.S.R. 690(E), dated 25th September, 2014 (w.e.f. 25-9-2014). 
549. 
Rule 11A omitted by G.S.R. 1242, dated 17 th September, 1979 (w.e.f. 6 -10-1979). Earlier rule 11A 
was inserted by Notification No. F. 1-5/53-DS, dated 17th January, 1955. 
550. Subs. by Notification No. F-1-6/62-D (S.O. 2889), dated 2nd July, 1969 (w.e.f. 02.07.1969). 
551. Subs. by Notification No. F-1-6/62-D (S.O. 2889), dated 2nd July, 1969 (w.e.f. 02.07.1969). 
552. Ins. by G.S.R. 663(E), dated 3rd July, 1992 (w.e.f. 3-7-1992). 
553. Rules 113 and 114 omitted by G.S.R. 663(E), dated 3rd July, 1992 (w.e.f. 3 -7-1992). 
554. Rules 116 and 118 omitted by G.S.R. 663(E), dated 3rd July, 1992 (w.e.f. 3 -7-1992). 
555. Subs. by G.S.R. 834(E), dated 29th December, 1999 (w.e.f. 30-12-1999). 
556. 
Subs. by S.O. 1449, dated 13th June, 1961. Earlier it was inserted by Notification No. F. 1 -27/56-D, 
dated 18th December, 1956. 
557. Ins. by G.S.R. 663(E), dated 3rd July, 1992 (w.e.f. 3-7-1992). 
558. Clause (b) omitted by G.S.R. 19(E), dated 15th December, 1977 (w.e.f. 7 -1-1978). 
559. Ins. by G.S.R. 663(E), dated 3rd July, 1992 (w.e.f. 3-7-1992). 
560. 
Part XA (containing rules 122A, 122B, 122C, 122 D, 122E) ins. by G.S.R. 944(E), dated 21 st 
September, 1988 (w.e.f. 21-9-1988). 
561. Subs. by G.S.R. 900(E), dated 12th December, 2001 (w.e.f. 12-12-2001). 
562. Subs. by G.S.R. 1193(E), dated 12th December, 2018, for "fifty thousand rupees" (w.e.f. 12-12- 2018). 
563. Subs. by G.S.R. 1193(E), dated 12th December, 2018, for "fifty thousand rupees" (w.e.f. 12 -12- 2018). 
564. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 1193(E), d ated 12th December, 2018, for "fifteen thousand rupees" (w.e.f. 12 -12- 
2018). 
565. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 918(E), dated 30th November, 2015, for "Appendix I or Appendix IA" (w.e.f. 30 -11-
2015.) 
566. Ins. by G.S.R. 900(E), dated 12th December, 2001 (w.e.f. 12-12-2001). 
567. 
The word “Other than the Drugs Classifable under Schedule C and C(1)”omitted by G.S.R. 26(E), 
dated 19th January, 2006 (w.e.f. 19-1-2006). 
568. Subs. by G.S.R. 900(E), dated 12th December, 2001 (w.e.f. 12-12-2001). 
569. Ins. by G.S.R. 900(E), dated 12th December, 2001 (w.e.f. 12-12-2001). 
570. Ins. by G.S.R. 26(E), dated 19th January, 2006 (w.e.f. 19-1-2006). 
571. Subs. by G.S.R. 26(E), dated 19th January, 2006 (w.e.f. 19-1-2006). 
572. Rule 122C omitted by G.S.R. 900(E), dated 12th December, 2001 (w.e.f. 12 -12-2001). 
573. Subs. by G.S.R. 900(E), dated 12th December, 2001 (w.e.f. 12-12-2001). 
574. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 1193(E), dated 12th December, 2018, for "fifteen thousand rupees" (w.e.f. 12 -12- 
2018). 
575. Ins. by G.S.R. 313(E), dated 16th March, 2016 (w.e.f. 16-3-2016). 
576. Ins. by G.S.R. 313(E), dated 16th March, 2016 (w.e.f. 16-3-2016). 
577. Subs. by G.S.R. 826(E), dated 30th October, 2015 (w.e.f. 30-10-2015). 
578. 
Rule 122DAA omitted by G.S.R. 826(E), dated 30th October, 2015 (w.e.f. 30 -10-2015). Eralier rule 
122DAA was inserted by G.S.R. 32(E), dated 20 th January, 2005 (w.e.f. 20-01-2005). 
579. Ins. by G.S.R. 53(E), dated 30th January, 2013, (w.e.f. 30-1-2013). 
580. Subs. by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014, for sub-rule (1) (w.e.f. 12-6-2015). 
581. Ins. by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014, (w.e.f. 12-6-2015). 
582. Ins. by G.S.R. 63(E), dated 1st February, 2013 (w.e.f. 1-2-2013). 
583. Ins. by G.S.R. 72(E), dated 8th February, 2013 (w.e.f. 8-2-2013). 
584. Subs. by G.S.R. 591(E), dated 17th August, 1999 (w.e.f. 17-8-1999). 
585. Subs. by G.S.R. 918(E), dated 30th November, 2015 (w.e.f. 30-11-2015.) 
586. Subs. by G.S.R. 45(E), dated 24th January, 2011 for item (i) (w.e.f. 24-1-2011) 
587. 
The word “or its inclusion in the Indian Pharmacopoeia whichever is earlier”omitted by G.S.R. 724(E), 
dated 7th November, 2013 (w.e.f. 7-11-2013). 
588. 
Part XB (containing rules 122F to 122P) ins. by G.S.R. 28(E), dated 22 nd January, 1993 (w.e.f. 22 -1-
1993). 
589. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "BLOOD BANKS" (w.e.f. 11 -3-2020). 
590. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011, for "AND MANUFACTURE OF BLOOD 
PRODUCTS" (w.e.f. 27-12-2011). 
591. Ins. by G.S.R. 245(E), dated 5th April, 1999 (w.e.f. 5-4-1999). 
592. Subs. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 for “and Part XIIC” (w.e.f. 27 -12-2011). 
593. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for clause (d) (w.e.f. 11-3-2020). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
594. Ins. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 (w.e.f. 27-12-2011). 
595. Ins. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, (w.e.f. 11-3-2020). 
596. Ins. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 (w.e.f. 27-12-2011). 
597. Ins. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, (w.e.f. 11-3-2020). 
598. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "BLOOD BANKS" (w.e.f. 11 -3-2020). 
599. Subs. by G.S.R. 245(E), dated 5th April, 1999 (w.e.f. 5-4-1999). 
600. Subs. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 for “or Form 27E” (w.e.f. 27 -12-2011). 
601. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
602. Subs. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 for second proviso (w.e.f. 27 -12-2011). 
603. 
Explanation omitted by G.S.R. 733(E), dated 21st December, 2005 (w.e.f. 21 -12-2005). Earlier 
Explanation was inserted by G.S.R. 89(E), dated 14 th February, 1996 (w.e.f. 14-2-1996). 
604. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
605. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
606. Ins. by G.S.R. 89(E), dated 14th February, 1996 (w.e.f. 14-2-1996). 
607. 
Corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R. 447(E), dated 10th June, 1993 to G.S.R . 28(E), dated 22nd 
January, 1993. 
608. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "BLOOD BANKS" (w.e.f. 11 -3-2020). 
609. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011, for "MANUFACTURE O F BLOOD 
PRODUCTS" (w.e.f. 27-12-2011). 
610. 
Rule 122G renumbered as sub -rule (1) by G.S.R. 733(E), dated 21st December, 2005 (w.e.f. 21 -12-
2005). 
611. Subs. by G.S.R. 245(E), dated 5th April, 1999 (w.e.f. 5-4-1999). 
612. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011, for "Form 26G or Form 26 -I,as the case may be, 
before a licence in Form 28C or Form 26G or Form 26-I" (w.e.f. 27-12-2011). 
613. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for condition (i) (w.e.f. 11 -3-2020). Earlier condition 
(i) was substituted by G.S.R. 245(E), dated 5th April, 1999 (w.e.f. 5-4-1999). 
614. Ins. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 (w.e.f. 27-12-2011). 
615. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for sub -rule (2) and Explanation (w.e.f. 11 -3-2020). 
Earlier sub-rule (2) and Explanation inserted by G.S.R. 733(E), dated 21 st December, 2005 (w.e.f. 21-
12-2005). 
616. Subs. by G.S.R. 245(E), dated 5th April, 1999 (w.e.f. 5-4-1999). 
617. Ins. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 (w.e.f. 27-12-2011). 
618. Ins. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 (w.e.f. 27-12-2011). 
619. Ins. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 (w.e.f. 27-12-2011). 
620. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
621. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "BLOOD BANKS" (w.e.f. 11 -3-2020). 
622. 
Corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R. 447(E), dated 10th June, 1993 to G.S.R. 28(E), dated 22 nd 
January, 1993. 
623. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
624. Subs. by G.S.R. 245(E), dated 5th April, 1999 (w.e.f. 5-4-1999). 
625. Ins. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 (w.e.f. 27-12-2011). 
626. 
Corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R. 447(E), dated 10th June, 1993 to G.S.R. 28(E), dated 22nd 
January, 1993. 
627. Ins. by G.S.R. 20(E), dated 11th January, 1996 (w.e.f. 11-1-1996). 
628. Corrected vide Corrigendum G.S.R. 514(E), dated 6th November, 1996. 
629. Subs. by G.S.R. 245(E), dated 5th April, 1999 (w.e.f. 5-4-1999). 
630. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011, for "Form 26G or Form 26 -I shall be subject to 
the special conditions set out in Schedule F, Part XIIB and Part XIIC” (w.e.f. 27 -12-2011). 
631. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "BLOOD BANKS" (w.e.f. 11 -3-2020). 
632. 
Corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R. 447(E), dated 10th June, 1993 to G.S.R. 28(E), dated 22nd 
January, 1993. 
633. Ins. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 (w.e.f. 27-12-2011). 
634. 
Corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R. 447(E), dated 10th June, 1993 to G.S.R. 28(E), dated 22nd 
January, 1993. 
635. 
Corrected vide corr igendum G.S.R. 447(E), dated 10th June, 1993 to G.S.R. 28(E), dated 22nd 
January, 1993. 
636. Published in the Gazette of India, Extra Pt. II, Sec.3(i), dated 22 nd January, 1993 (w.e.f. 22-5-1993). 
637. Ins. by G.S.R. 245(E), dated 5th April, 1999 (w.e.f. 5-4-1999). 
638. Ins. by G.S.R. 328(E), dated 3rd April, 2017 (w.e.f. 3-4-2017). 
639. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "BLOOD BANKS" (w.e.f. 11-3-2020). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
640. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "BLOOD BANKS" (w.e.f. 11 -3-2020). 
641. Subs. by G.S.R. 19(E), dated 15th December, 1977 (w.e.f. 7-1-1978). 
642. 
Rule 124A omitted by G.S.R. 103(E), dated 2nd February, 2017 (w.e.f. 2 -2-2017). Earlier rule 124A 
was inserted by S.O. 2889, dated 2nd July, 1969 (w.e.f. 19 -7-1969) and amended by G.S.R. 647(E), 
dated 28th October, 1998 (w.e.f. 28-10-1998). 
643. Added by G.S.R 665(E), dated 6th May, 1977 (w.e.f. 28-5-1977). 
644. Ins by G.S.R. 318(E), dated 1st May, 1984 (w.e.f. 1-5-1984). 
645. Ins. by G.S.R. 1115(E), dated 30th September, 1986 (w.e.f. 30-9-1986). 
646. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-28/65-T) (S.O. 886), dated 8th March, 1966 (w.e.f. 26-3-1966). 
647. Ins by G.S.R. 109(E), dated 22nd February, 1994 (w.e.f. 22-2-1994). 
648. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-20/60-D (S.O. 400), dated 24th January, 1964 (w.e.f. 1-2-1964). 
649. 
Subs-heading "Insecticides" and the entry relating thereto omitted by G.S.R. 139, dated 8th January, 
1976 (w.e.f. 31-1-1976). 
650. Added by Notification No. F. 1-13/60-D (S.O. 23), dated 23rd December, 1969 (w.e.f. 3-1-1970). 
651. Ins. by G.S.R. 245(E), dated 17th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 17-6-1996). 
652. Subs. By S.O. 289, dated 20th December, 1972 (w.e.f. 3-2-1973) 
653. Ins. by G.S.R. 1074(E), dated 19th August, 1978. 
654. Subs. By G.S.R. 370(E), dated 7th April, 1994 (w.e.f. 7-4-1994). 
655. Ins. by G.S.R. 76(E), dated 8rd February, 2012 (w.e.f.8-2-2012). 
656. Ins. by G.S.R. 681(E), dated 6th June, 1988 (w.e.f. 6-6-1988). 
657. Ins. by G.S.R. 1074(E), dated 19th August, 1978. 
658. Omitted by G.S.R. 753(E), dated 4th November, 1999 (w.e.f. 4-11-1999). 
659. Subs. by G.S.R. 11(E), dated 7th January, 1991 (w.e.f. 7-11-1991). 
660. Omitted by G.S.R. 753(E), dated 4th November, 1999 (w.e.f. 4-11-1999). 
661. Ins. by G.S.R. 1074(E), dated 19th August, 1978. 
662. Ins. by G.S.R. 1074(E), dated 19th August, 1978. 
663. 
Ins. By G.S.R. 623(E) dated 10-08-2022 (w.e.f. 10-08-2022). Earlier this proviso was inserted by 
G.S.R. 76(E), dated 8rd February, 2012 (w.e.f.8-2-2012). Before substitution the proviso stood as: 
“Provided that disinfectants mya also contain colours specified under Schdule Q, which are non -
staining.” 
664. Ins. by G.S.R. 1186(E), dated 7th December, 2018 (w.e.f. 7-12-2018). 
665. Added by Notification No. F. 1-37/58-D, dated 21st July, 1958. 
666. 
Part XIII (containing rules 129, 129A to 129H 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 134A, 135, 135A, 135B, 136) 
omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). Earlier Par t XIII 
(containing rules 129, 129A, to 129H) inserted by Notification No. F. 1 -36/64-D (G.S.R. 1183), dated 
17th August, 1964 (w.e.f. 22 -8-1964). Rule 129, Rules 129A to 129H subs. by G.S.R. 426(E), dated 
19th May, 2010, read with corrigendum G.S.R. 263(E) , dated 30th March, 2011, corrigendum G.S.R. 
733(E), dated 29th September, 2011, corrigendum G.S.R. 270(E), dated 30th March, 2012 and 
corrigendum G.S.R. 733(E), dated 29th September, 2012 for rule129 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2013). 
667. 
Part XIV (containing rules 137, 138, 138A, 139, 139A, 139AA, 139AB, 139AC, 139AD, 139AE, 
139B, 140, 141, 141A, 141AA, 142, 142A, 142B, 143, 143A, 144, 144A, 145, 145A, 145AA, 145B, 
145BA, 145C, 145D)omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
668. 
Part XV (containing rules 145, 147, 148, 148A, 148B, 148C, 149, 149A, 150, 150A) omitted by G.S.R. 
763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
669. 
Part XV(A) (containing rules 150B to 150K) ins. by G.S.R. 1172, dated 23rd August, 1977 (w.e.f. 23 -
8-1977). 
670. The words "cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). 
671. Ins. by G.S.R. 223(E), dated 18th March, 2019 (w.e.f. 19-3-2019). 
672. The words "cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). 
673. 
The words "OR RENEWAL" omitted by G.S .R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-
2017). 
674. The words "or cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). 
675. 
Ins. by G.S.R. 223(E), dated 18t h March, 2019, for “ for sale of drugs or cosmetics, shall be made in 
Form 36” (w.e.f. 19-3-2019). 
676. The words "and cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). 
677. 
Proviso omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier proviso was 
substituted by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
678. Ins. by G.S.R. 510(E), dated 26th July, 1982 (w.e.f. 26-7-1982). 
679. Subs. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
680. The words "cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
681. The words "and cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). 
682 The words "or cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). 
683. Ins. by G.S.R. 223(E), dated 18th March, 2019 (w.e.f. 19-3-2019). 
684. 
The words "OR RENEWAL" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-
2017). 
685. 
The words "or cosmetics as the case may be" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 
(w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
686. 
The words "OR RENEWED" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-
2017). 
687. The words "or cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). 
688. 
The words "or cosmetics as the case may be" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th Decemb er, 2020 
(w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
689. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 for rule 150D (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier rule 
150D was inserted by G.S.R. 1172 (E), dated 23rd August, 1977 (w.e.f. 23 -8-1977) and amended by 
G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
690. Ins. by G.S.R 780(E), dated 10th November, 2008 (w.e.f. 1-11-2010). 
691. The words "or cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
692. The words "OR RENEWAL" omitted by G.S.R. 499(E), dated 17th July, 2019 (w.e.f. 17-7-2019). 
693. Subs. by G.S.R. 223(E), dated 18th March, 2019 for clause (f) (w.e.f. 19-3-2019). 
694. The word "or a cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). 
695. Ins. by G.S.R. 93(E), dated 24th February, 1995 (w.e.f. 24-2-1995). 
696. 
The words "or cosmetics as the case may be" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 
(w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
697. The word "or cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
698. Sub. by G.S.R. 601(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
699. Rule 150J omitted by G.S.R. 499(E), dated 17th July, 2019 (w.e.f. 17-7-2019). 
700. 
The word "or items of cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-
2020). 
701. 
Part XVI (containing rules 151 to 153, 154 to 160) added by Notification No. F. 1 -23/6 (S.O. 642(E)), 
dated 2nd February, 1970 (w.e.f. 21-2-1970). 
702. Subs, by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for "(Including Siddha)" (w.e.f. 1 -10-2021). 
703. Subs, by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for "(Including Siddha)" (w.e.f. 1-10-2021). 
704. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for rule 153 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2021). Earlier rule 153was 
amended by G.S.R. 79(E), dated 14th February, 2005 (w.e.f. 14-2-2005). 
705. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for rule 153A (w.e.f. 1 -10-2021). Earlier rule 153A 
was added by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 20 th July, 1978 (w.e.f. 20 -7-1978) and amended by G.S.R. 79(E), 
dated 14th February, 2005 (w.e.f. 14-2-2005). 
706. Subs, by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for rule 154 (w.e.f. 1-10-2021). 
707. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for rule 154A (w.e.f. 1 -10-2021). Earlier ru le 154A 
was added by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 20tih July, 1978 (w.e.f. 20-7-1978). 
708. Rule 155 was omitted by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021,(w.e.f. 1-10-2021). 
709. 
Rule 155A was omitted by G.S .R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021,(w.e.f. 1 -10-2021). Earlier rule 
155A was added by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 20th July, 1978 (w.e.f. 20-7-1978). 
710. Ins. by G.S.R. 198(E), dated 7th March, 2003 (w.e.f. 7-3-2003). 
711. 
Rule 155B renumbered as sub -rule (1) thereof by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 3 rd May, 2010 (w.e.f. 3 -4-
2010). 
712. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for “for period of five years” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2021). 
Earlier these words were inserted by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 3 rd May, 2010 (w.e.f. 3-5-2010). 
713. 
Sub-rule (2) was omitted by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021,(w.e.f. 4 -10-2021). Earlier sub -
rule (2) was inserted by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 3rd May, 2010 (w.e.f. 3-4-2010). 
714. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for rule 156 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2021). Earlier rule 156 was 
amended by G.S.R. 79(E), dated 14th February, 2005 (w.e.f. 14 -2-2005) and by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 
3rd May, 2010 (w.e.f. 3-5-2010). 
715. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for rule 156A (w.e.f. 1 -10-2021). Earlier rule 156A 
was added by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 3 rd May, 2010 (w.e.f. 3 -5-2010) an d amended by G.S.R. 79(E), 
dated 14th February, 2005 (w.e.f. 14-2-2005) 
716. The words "OR RENEWAL" omitted by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021 (w.e.f. 1-10-2021). 
717. 
The words “or renewed in Form 26D” omitted by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021 (w.e.f. 1 -10-
2021). 
718. Subs, by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for "(Including Siddha)" (w.e.f. 1 -10-2021). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
719. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 3rd May, 2010, for clause (1A) (w.e.f. 4 -5-2010). Earlier clause (1A) 
was inserted by G.S.R. 198(E), dated 7th March, 2003 (w.e.f. 7-3-2003). 
720. The words "OR RENEWAL" omitted by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021 (w.e.f. 1-10-2021). 
721. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 390(E), dated 18 th May, 2015, for sub -rules (1B) and (1C) (w.e.f .18 -5-2016). Earlier 
sub-rules (1B) and (1C) was inserted by G.S.R704(E), dated 25 th October, 2013 (w.e.f. 25-10-2013). 
722. Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for sub-rule (1D) (w.e.f. 1-10-2021). 
723. Sub-rule (1E) omitted by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2021). 
724. Ins. by G.S.R. 512(E), dated 9th July, 2008 (w.e.f. 9-7-2008). 
725. Ins. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021 (w.e.f. 1-10-2021). 
726. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for sub -clause (c) (w.e.f. 1 -10-2021). Earlier sub -
clause (c) was inserted by G.S.R. 331(E) dated 8 th May, 1984 (w.e.f.8-5-1984). 
727. Added by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 20th July, 1978 (w.e.f. 20-7-1978) 
728. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for sub -clause (e) (w.e.f. 1 -10-2021). Earlier sub -
clause (e) was inserted by G.S.R. 331(E) dated 8 th May, 1984 (w.e.f.8-5-1984). 
729. Ins. by G.S.R. 663(E), dated 10th August, 2010 (w.e.f. 10-8-2010). 
730. Ins. by G.S.R. 153(E), dated 5th March, 2014 (w.e.f. 5-3-2014). 
731. Ins. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021 (w.e.f. 1-10-2021). 
732. Ins. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021 (w.e.f. 1-10-2021). 
733. Part XVII (containing rule 161) added by Notification No. F. 1-23/6, dated 2nd Feburary, 1970. 
734. Subs. by G.S.R. 904(E), dated 2nd November, 1992 (w.e.f. 2-11-1992). 
735. Ins. by G.S.R. 844(E), dated 26th November, 2012 (w.e.f. 26-11-2013). 
736. Subs. by G.S.R. 844(E), dated 26th November, 2012 (w.e.f. 26-11-2013). 
737. Ins. by G.S.R. 904(E), dated 2nd November, 1992 (w.e.f. 2-11-1992). 
738. Ins. by G.S.R. 787(E), dated 17th October, 2000 (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
739. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 789 (E), dated 12th August, 2016, for rule 161B (w.e.f. 12 -8-2016). Earlier rule 161B 
was inserted by G.S.R. 764(E), dated 15th October, 2009 (w.e.f. 15-10-2009). 
740. Part XVIII (containing rule 162 to 167) added by Notification No. F. 1-23/6, dated 2nd Feburary, 1970. 
741. Ins. by G.S.R. 76(E), dated 3rd February, 2003 (w.e.f. 3-2-2003). 
742. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for rule 163A (w.e.f. 23 -3-2021). Earlier rule 163A 
was inserted by G.S.R. 352(E), dated 1st June, 2006 (w.e.f. 8-6-2006). 
743. Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for rule 163B (w.e.f. 23 -3-2021). 
744. Ins. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021 (w.e.f. 23-3-2021). 
745. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for “Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian 
Medicine” (w.e.f. 23-3-2021). 
746. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), da ted 22nd March, 2021, for “Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian 
Medicine” (w.e.f. 23-3-2021). 
747. Ins. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021 (w.e.f. 23-3-2021). 
748. Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for rule 164 (w.e.f. 23-3-2021). 
749. Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for “Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani” (w.e.f. 23 -3-2021). 
750. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd Marc h, 2021, for “and Boards of Indian Systems of Medicine” 
(w.e.f. 23-3-2021). 
751. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for “Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani” (w.e.f. 
23-3-2021). 
752. The words “of Chapter VIA” omitted by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021 (w.e.f. 23 -3-2021). 
753. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for rule 167 (w.e.f. 23 -3-2021). Earlier rule 167 was 
sub. by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 20th July, 1978 (w.e.f. 20-7-1978) 
754. Part XIX (containing rule 168) inserted by G.S.R. 519(E), dated 26 th June, 1995 (w.e.f. 26-6-1995). 
755. Subs. by G.S.R. 422(E), dated 11th June, 2002 (w.e.f. 11-6-2002). 
756. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 755(E), dated 23ed October, 2008, for rule 169 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2008). Earlier rule 169 
was added by G.S.R. 285(E) dated 11th May, 2005 (w.e.f. 12-5-2005). 
757. Ins. by G.S.R. 1230(E), dated 21st December, 2018 (w.e.f. 24-12-2018). 
758. Ins. by G.S.R. 352(E), dated 1st June, 2006 (w.e.f. 8-6-2006). 
759. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for heading “Mem orandum to the Pharmocoposial 
Laboratory for Indian Medicine (PLIM)” (w.e.f. 23-3-2021). 
760. Ins. by G.S.R. 352(E), dated 1st June, 2006 (w.e.f. 8-6-2006). 
761. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd Mar ch, 2021, for “Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian 
Medicine” (w.e.f. 23-3-2021). 
762. Forms 3 to 7 omitted by Notification No. F. 1-16/57-D, dated 15th June, 1957. 
763. Subs. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for Form 8 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
764. Subs. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for Form 8A (w.e.f. 24 -8-2001). Earlier Form 8A 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
was inserted by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
765. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
766. 
Subs. By G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for “signed by or on behalf of the manufacturer” 
(w.e.f. 1-1-2003). 
767. Subs. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for Form 10 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2001). 
768. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for Form 10A (w.e.f. 24 -8-2001). Earlier Form 10A 
was inserted by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
769. Subs. by G.S.R. 103(E), dated 2nd February, 2017, for “one year” (w.e.f. 2 -2-2017). 
770. Ins. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
771. 
Added by Notification No. F. 1 -36/54-DS, dated 3 rd March, 1955 and amended by G.S.R. 753(E), 
dated 4th November, 1999 (w.e.f. 4-11-1999). 
772. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th Au gust, 2001, for “A fee of rupees fifteen has been credited to 
Government under the Head of Account “ 0210 -Medical and Public Health, 04 -Public Health, 104 -
Fees and Fines under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 - Central” vide treasury receipt attached.” 
(w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
773. Ins. by Notification No. F. 1-36/54-DS, dated 3rd March, 1955. 
774. Ins. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). 
775. Subs. by G.S.R. 753(E), dated 4th November, 1999 (w.e.f. 4-11-1999). 
776. Subs. by G.S.R. 521(E), dated 1st June, 2018, for "for a period of six months" (w.e.f. 1 -6-2018). 
777. Subs, by G.S.R. 59 (E), dated 7th February, 1995 (w.e.f. 7-2-1995). 
778. Added by Notification No. F. 1-23/67-D (S.O. 642(E)), dated 2nd February, 1970 (w.e.f. 21-2-1970). 
779. Ins. by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 3rd May, 2010 (w.e.f. 3-5-2010). 
780. Added by Notification No. 1-3/51-DS, dated 15th October, 1954. 
781. Subs. by G.S.R. 1594, dated 28th October, 1976 (w.e.f. 13-11-1976). 
782. The words “cosmetics” omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15 th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
783. Subs. by G.S.R. 926, dated 24th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16-7-1977). 
784. The words “or cosmetics” omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
785. Subs. by S.O. 2139(E), dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
786. The words “cosmetics” omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15 th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
787. Ins. By G.S.R. 292(E) dated 29th May, 1997 (w.e.f.29-5-1997) 
788. The words “or cosmetics” omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15 th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
789. Subs. by G.S.R. 592(E), dated 13th August, 2008, for the figure"19" (w.e.f. 13-8-2008). 
790. Subs. By G.S.R. 370(E), dated 7th April, 1994 (w.e.f. 7-4-1994). 
791. Added by Notification No. F. 1-23/67-D (S.O. 642(E)), dated 2nd February, 1970 (w.e.f. 21-2-1970). 
792. Subs. By G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
793. 
The words " OR RENEWAL " omitted by G.S.R. 1 337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-
2017). 
794. 
The words " OR RENEWAL " omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-
2017). 
795. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
796. Omitted by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996). 
797. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
798. Subs. by G.S.R. 487(E) dated 2nd July, 1984 (w.e.f. 2-7-1984). 
799. Ins. by G.S.R. 42(E), dated, 25th January, 1979 (w.e.f. 25-1-1979). 
800. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
801. 
The words " OR RENEWAL " omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-
2017). 
802. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
803. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
804. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
805. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
806. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
807. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996). 
808. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
809. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 504(E) dated 18th July, 2002 (w.e.f. 18 -7-2002) 
810. Subs. by Notification No. 1-63/61-D, dated 17th July, 1963. 
811. Ins. By S.O. 23 (E) dated 23rd December, 1969 (w.e.f. 3-1-1970). 
812. 
Clause 4 omitted by S.O. 289(E) dated 20 th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 3-2-1973). Earlier clause (4) added 
by Notification No. F.1-113/69-D, dated 23rd December, 1969. 
813. Ins. by G.S.R. 42(E), dated, 25th January, 1979 (w.e.f. 25-1-1979). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
814. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
815. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 2 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
816. Added by Notification No. F. 1-35/64-D (G.S.R. 1185), dated 18th August, 1964 (w.e.f. 22-8-1964) 
817. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
818. Added by Notification No. F. 1-59/68-D (S.O. 4816), dated 19th November , 1969 (w.e.f. 6-12-1969) 
819. Added by G.S.R 665(E), dated 6th May, 1977 (w.e.f. 28-5-1977). 
820. Added by Notification No. F. 1-35/64-D (G.S.R. 1185), dated 18th August, 1964 (w.e.f. 22-8-1964) 
821. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
822. Added by G.S.R 665(E), dated 6th May, 1977 (w.e.f. 28-5-1977) (w.e.f. 28-5-1977). 
823. Added by Notification no. F.1-14/67-D (G.S.R. 594), dated 3rd February, 1969. 
824. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
825. 
Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22 nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22 -6-1982) correcte d vide corrigendum G.S.R. 
373(E) dated 2nd May, 1983. 
826. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 3 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
827. 
Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22 nd June, 1982 (w. e.f. 22 -6-1982) corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R. 
373(E) dated 2nd May, 1983. 
828. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
829. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 3 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
830. Ins. By G.S.R. 370(E), dated 7th April, 1994 (w.e.f. 7-4-1994). 
831. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
832. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
833. Subs. by S.O. 2139(E), dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
834. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 2 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
835. Condition No. 3 omitted by G.S.R. 17(E) dated 7 th January 1986 (w.e.f.7-1-1986). 
836. Added by Notification No. 1-63/61-D, dated 17th July, 1963. 
837. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
838. Ins. by S.O. 1458(E), dated 27th April, 1965 (w.e.f. 8-5-1965). 
839. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
840. Subs. by G.S.R. 487(E), dated 2nd July, 1984 (w.e.f. 2-7-1984). 
841. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 2 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
842. SI. No. 4 omitted by G.S.R. 504(E) dated 18th July, 2002 (w.e.f. 18 -7-2002) 
843. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996). 
844. Condition No. 2 omitted by G.S.R. 17(E) dated 7 th January 1986 (w.e.f. 7-1-1986). 
845. Ins. by S.O. 1458(E), dated 27th April, 1965 (w.e.f. 8-5-1965). 
846. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
847. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
848. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 2 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
849. Ins. by G.S.R. 681(E), dated 6th June, 1988 (w.e.f. 6-6-1988). 
850. Condition No. 2 omitted by G.S.R. 17(E) dated 7 th January 1986 (w.e.f. 7-1-1986). 
851. Added by Notification No. 1-63/61-D, dated 17th July, 1963. 
852. Added by Notification No. F.1-113/69-D (S.O. 23), dated 23rd December, 1969 (w.e.f. 3-1-1970) 
853. Ins. by S.O. 1458(E), dated 27th April, 1965 (w.e.f. 8-5-1965). 
854. Ins. by G.S.R. 42(E), dated, 25th January, 1979 (w.e.f. 25-1-1979). 
855. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 2 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
856. 
FORM 21C omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier FORM 
21C was amended by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22 -6-1982) and by G.S.R. 788(E), 
dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
857. 
FORM 21CC omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier 
FORM 21CC was inserted by G.S.R. 42(E), dated 25th January, 1979 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1979) and amended 
by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
858. FORMS 22 and 23 omitted by S.O. 289(E), dated 20th December, 1962. 
859. 
The words " OR RENEWAL ” omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-
2017). 
860. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
861. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
862. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for "grant/renewal" (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
863. Ins. by S.O. 1196(E), dated 6th May, 1960 (w.e.f. 14-5-1960). 
864. 
The words " OR RENEWAL ” omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th Octo ber, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-
2017). 
865. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
866. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for "grant/renewal" (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
867. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-598-D (S.O. 4816) dated 19th November, 1969(w.e.f. 6-12-1969). 
868. 
Ins. by G.S.R. 499(E), dated 17 th July, 2019 (w.e.f. 17 -7-2019). Earlier it was omitted by G.S.R. 
1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017) 
869. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
870. 
Subs. By G.S.R. 13(E) dated 7 th January, 1983 (w.e.f. 7 -1-1983) co rrected vide corrigendum G.S.R. 
334(E) dated 11th May, 1983. 
871. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 499(E), dated 17 th July, 2019, for “grant” (w.e.f. 17 -7-2019). Earlier the word “grant” 
was substituted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017) 
872. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for Form 24D (w.e.f. 4 -10-2021). Earlier Form 24D 
was inserted by Notification No. 1-23/6 (S.O. 642), dated 2nd February, 1970 (w.e.f. 21-2-1970). 
873. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for Form 24E (w.e.f. 4 -10-2021). Earlier Form 24E 
was added by G.S.R. 376(E) dated 20th July, 1978 (w.e.f. 20-7-1978). 
874. Ins. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, (w.e.f. 4-10-2021). 
875. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
876. 
The words " OR RENEWAL ” omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 2 7-10-
2017). 
877. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
878. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for "grant/renewal" (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
879. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
880. Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996). 
881. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 3 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
882. Ins. by G.S.R. 923(E), dated 14th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 14-12-1992). 
883. 
The words "and any certificate of renewal in force" omitted by G.S.R. 1337( E), dated 27 th October, 
2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
884. Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996). 
885 Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
886. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
887. Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996). 
888. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 4 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
889. 
The words "and any certificate of renewal in force" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 
2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
890. Added by Notification No. F. 1-22/59-D, dated 9th April, 1960. 
891. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
892. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 2 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
893. 
The words "and any certificate of renewal in force" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 
2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
894. Added by Notification No. F. 1-36/64-D, dated 18th august, 1964. 
895. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
896. Subs. By G.S.R. 13(E) dated 7th January, 1983 (w.e.f. 7-1-1983) 
897. Added by S.O. 903(E), dated 10th February, 1976 (w.e.f. 28-2-1976). 
898. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for Form 25D (w.e.f. 4 -10-2021). Earlier Form 25D 
was added by Notification No. 1-23/67-D (S.O. 642), dated 2nd February, 1970 (w.e.f. 21-2-1970). 
899. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for Form 25E (w.e.f. 4 -10-2021). Earlier Form 25E 
was added by G.S.R. 376(E) dated 20th July, 1978 (w.e.f. 20-7-1978). 
900. Ins. By G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
901. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
902. Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996). 
903. Ins. by G.S.R. 923(E), dated 14th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 14-12-1992). 
904. 
The words "and any certificate of renewal in force" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th 
October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
905. Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996). 
906. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
907. 
FORM 26 omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier FORM 
26 was substituted by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22 nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
908. 
FORM 26A omitted by G.S.R 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier FORM 
26 was substituted by G.S.R 462(E), dated 22 nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
909. 
FORM 26B omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier FORM 
26B was substituted by Notification No. F. 1-22/59-D, dated 9th April, 1964. 
910. Subs. By G.S.R. 370(E), dated 7th April, 1994 (w.e.f. 7-4-1994). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
911. Added by Notification No. 1-23/67-D (S.O. 642(E)) dated 2nd February, 1970 (w.e.f. 21-2-1970). 
912. Added by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 20th July, 1978 (w.e.f. 20-7-1978). 
913. Added by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 20th July, 1978 (w.e.f. 20-7-1978). 
914. Ins. By G.S.R. 198(E) dated 7th March, 2003 (w.e.f. 7-3-2003). 
915. Subs. by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 3rd May, 2010, for "period of two years" (w.e.f. 4-5-2010). 
916. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1 st October, 202, for Form 26E2 -I (w.e.f. 4 -10-2021). Earlier Form 
26E2-I was inserted by G.S.R. 153(E) dated 5th March, 2014 (w.e.f. 5-3-2014). 
917. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1 st October, 202, for F orm 26E2 -II (w.e.f. 4 -10-2021). Earlier Form 
26E2-II was inserted by G.S.R. 153(E) dated 5th March, 2014 (w.e.f. 5-3-2014). 
918. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1 st October, 202, for Form 26E3 (w.e.f. 4 -10-2021). Earlier Form 26E3 
was inserted by G.S.R. 153(E) dated 5th March, 2014 (w.e.f. 5-3-2014). 
919. Ins. By G.S.R. 1230(E) dated 21st December, 2018 (w.e.f. 24-12-2018). 
920. Ins. By G.S.R. 1230(E) dated 21st December, 2018 (w.e.f. 24-12-2018). 
921. 
FORM 26F omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier FORM 
26F was inserted by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22 nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22 -6-1982) and amended by G.S.R. 
923(E), dated 14th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 14.12.1992), by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4 th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 
4-6-1996). 
922. 
Subs. By G.S.R 245(E) dated 5 th April, 1999, for Form 26G (w.e.f. 5 -4-1999). Earlier Form 26G was 
inserted by G.S.R. 28(E) dated 22nd January, 1993 (w.e.f. 22-1-1993). 
923. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "BLOOD BANK" (w.e.f. 11-3-2020). 
924. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "Blood Bank" (w.e.f. 11-3-2020). 
925. 
FORM 26H omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017).Earlier FORM 
26H was inserted by G.S.R. 119(E) dated 11 th March , 1996 (w.e.f.11 -3-1996) and corrected vide 
corrigendum G.S.R. 513(E) dated 5 th November, 1996 and by G.S.R. 26(E) dated 19 th January, 2006 
(w.e.f. 19-1-2006). 
926. Ins. By G.S.R 245(E) dated 5th April, 1999 (w.e.f. 5-4-1999). 
927. Ins. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 (w.e.f. 27-12-2011). 
928. 
Form 26J omitted by G.S.R. 499(E), dated 17 th July, 2019 (w.e.f. 17 -7-2019). Earlier Form 26J was 
inserted by G.S.R. 574(E), dated 17th July, 2012 (w.e.f. 17-7-2012). 
929. 
The words " OR RENEWAL " omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-
2017). 
930. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
931. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
932. Ins. by G.S.R. 28(E), dated 22nd January, 1993 (w.e.f. 22-1-1993). 
933. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for "grant/renewal" (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
934. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
935. 
The words " OR RENEWAL " omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 2 7-10-
2017). 
936. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985, for FORM 21C (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
937. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for "grant/renewal" (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
938. 
Subs. By G.S.R 245(E) dated 5 th April, 1999, for Form 27C(w.e.f. 5 -4-1999). Earlier Form 27C was 
inserted by G.S.R. 28(E) dated 22nd January, 1993 (w.e.f. 22-1-1993) 
939. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "BLOOD BANK" (w.e.f. 11-3-2020). 
940. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "Blood Bank" (w.e.f. 11 -3-2020). 
941. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "Blood Bank" (w.e.f. 11-3-2020). 
942. 
Ins. by G.S.R. 119(E) dated 11 th March, 1996 (w.e.f.11 -3-1996) corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R. 
513(E) dated 5th November, 1996 
943. 
The words " OR RENEWAL " omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-
2017). 
944. Subs. by G.S.R. 26(E) dated 19th January, 2006 (w.e.f. 19-1-2006). 
945. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for "grant/renewal" (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
946. Ins. by G.S.R. 574(E), dated 17th July, 2012 (w.e.f. 17-7-2012). 
947. 
The words " OR RENEWAL " omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-
2017). 
948. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for "grant/renewal" (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
949. Ins. By G.S.R 245(E) dated 5th April, 1999 (w.e.f. 5-4-1999). 
950. Ins. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 (w.e.f. 27-12-2011). 
951. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
952. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
953. Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
954. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 4 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
955. Ins. by G.S.R. 923(E), dated 14th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 14-12-1992). 
956. 
The words "and any certificate of renewal in force" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 
2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
957. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
958. Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996). 
959. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
960. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
961. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
962. Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996). 
963. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017, for paragraph 3A (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier 
paragraph 3A was inserted by Notification No. F. 1-10/62-D dated 10th April, 1964. 
964. 
The words "and any certificate of renewal in force" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 
2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
965. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
966. Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985). 
967. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 4 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
968. Ins. by G.S.R. 923(E), dated 14th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 14-12-1992). 
969. 
The words "and any certificate of renewal in force" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 
2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
970. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 245(E), dated 5th April, 1999, for Form 28C (w.e.f. 5 -4-1999). Earlier Form 28C was 
inserted by G.S.R. 28(E) dated 22nd November, 1993. 
971. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for “BLOOD BANK” (w.e.f. 11-3-2020). 
972. 
Ins. by G.S.R. 119(E) dated 11 th March, 1996 (w.e.f.11 -3-1996) corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R. 
513(E) dated 5th November, 1996 
973. Subs. by G.S.R. 26(E) dated 19th January, 2006 (w.e.f. 19-1-2006). 
974. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 5 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
975. 
The words "and any certificate of renewal in fo rce" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 
2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
976. Ins. by G.S.R. 574(E), dated 17th July, 2012 (w.e.f. 17-7-2012). 
977. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 3 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
978. 
The words "and any certificate of renewal in force" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 
2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
979. Ins. By G.S.R 245(E) dated 5th April, 1999 (w.e.f. 5-4-1999). 
980. Ins. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 (w.e.f. 27-12-2011). 
981. Subs. by G.S.R. 103(E), dated 2nd February, 2017, for "one year" (w.e.f. 2-2-2017). 
982. 
FORM 31 omitted By G.S.R. 763(E), Dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). Earlier Form 
31 was added by Notification No. F. 1-36/64-D (G.S.R. 1183 (E)), dated 17th August 1964 (w.e.f. 22-8-
1964) and amended by G.S.R. 788(E) dated 10 th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10 -10-1985), by G.S.R. 
1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
983. 
FORM 31A omitted By G.S.R. 763(E), Dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). Earlier Form 
31A was ad ded by G.S.R. 444(E) dated 31 st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28 -4-1973) and amended by G.S.R. 
788(E) dated 10 th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10 -10-1985), by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 
(w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
984. 
FORM 32 omitted By G .S.R. 763(E), Dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). Earlier Form 
32 was added by Notification No. F. 1 -36/64-D dated 17 th August 1964 (w.e.f. 22 -8-1964) and 
amended by S.O. 903(E) dated 10 th February, 1976 (w.e.f. 28 -2-1976), by G.S.R. 788(E) date d 10 th 
October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10 -10-1985) and by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-
2017). 
985. 
FORM 32A omitted By G.S.R. 763(E), Dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). Earlier Form 
32A was added by N otification No. F. 1 -36/64-D dated 17 th August 1964 (w.e.f. 22 -8-1964) and 
amended by S.O. 903(E) dated 10 th February, 1976 (w.e.f. 28 -2-1976), by G.S.R. 788(E) dated 10 th 
October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10 -10-1985) and by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w .e.f. 27 -10-
2017). 
986. 
FORM 33 omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). Earlier FORM 33 
was added by Notification No. F. 1 -36/64-D (G.S.R. 1183(E)) dated 17 th August 1964 (w.e.f. 22 -8-
1964). 
987. 
FORM 33A omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier FORM 
33A was added by G.S.R. 444(E) dated 31 st March, 1973 (w.e.f. 28-4-1973). 
988. FORM 34 omitted By G.S.R . 763(E), Dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). Earlier Form 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
34 was added by Notification No. F. 1 -36/64-D (S.O. 1183(E)) dated 17 th August 1964 (w.e.f. 22 -8-
1964) and amended by G.S.R. 59(E) dated 7 th February, 1995 (w.e.f. 7 -2-1995), by G.S.R. 5 10(E) 
dated 26 th July, 1982 (w.e.f. 26 -7-1982) and corrected by corrigendum G.S.R. 61(E), dated 11 th 
February, 1982. 
989. Added by Notification No. F. 1-14/68-D (G.S.R. 3869) dated 26th October, 1968 (w.e.f. 2-11-1968) 
990. Subs. by G.S.R. 592(E), dated 13th August, 2008, (w.e.f. 13-8-2008). 
991. Ins. by G.S.R. 1172(E), dated 23rd August, 1977 (w.e.f. 10-9-1977) 
992. 
The words " OR RENEWAL " omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-
2017). 
993. The word "COSMETICS” omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15 th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020) 
994. Ins. by G.S.R. 223(E), dated 18th March, 2019 (w.e.f. 19-3-2019). 
995. The words "or renewal" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). 
996. 
The words "items of cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), da ted 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f 15 -12-
2020). 
997. The word "Cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). 
998. Ins. by G.S.R. 1172(E), dated 23rd August, 1977. 
999. Ins. by G.S.R. 223(E), dated 18th March, 2019 (w.e.f. 19-3-2019). 
1000. Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996). 
1001. 
The words "items of cosmet ics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f 15 -12-
2020). 
1002. Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 3 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). 
1003. 
The words "and any ce rtificate of renewal in Form 38" omitted by G.S.R. 499(E), dated 17th July, 
2019 (w.e.f. 17-7-2019). 
1004. 
The words "or items of cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -1-
2020). 
1005. Subs. by G.S.R. 681(E), dated 5th December, 1980 (w.e.f. 5-12-1980) 
1006. 
FORM 38 omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2017). Earlier FORM 38 
was inserted by G.S.R. 1172, dated 23rd August, 1977 and amended by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 
1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996). 
1007. Ins. by G.S.R. 1172(E), dated 23rd August, 1977. 
1008. The word "cosmetic" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
1009. Subs. by G.S.R. 681(E), dated 6th June 1988 (w.e.f. 6-6-1988). 
1010. Ins. by G.S.R. 223(E), dated 18th March, 2019 (w.e.f. 19-3-2019). 
1011. Ins. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 1-2-2003). 
1012. Figures “(1), (2) and (3)” omitted by G.S.R. 35(E), dated 20 th January, 2005 (w.e.f. 20-1-2005). 
1013. Ins. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 1-2-2003). 
1014. Figures “(1), (2) and (3)” omitted by G.S.R. 35(E), dated 20 th January, 2005 (w.e.f. 20-1-2005). 
1015. 
FORM 42 omitted By G.S.R . 763(E), Dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). Earlier Form 
42 was added by G.S.R. 426(E) dated 19 th May, 2010, read with corrigendum G.S.R. 263(E), dated 
30th March, 2011, corrigendum G.S.R. 733(E), dated 29th September, 2011, corrigendum G.S.R. 
270(E), dated 30th March, 2012 and corrigendum G.S.R. 733(E), dated 29th March, 2012 (w.e.f. 1 -4-
2013). 
1016. 
FORM 43 omitted By G.S.R. 763(E), Dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). Earlier Form 
43 was added by G.S.R. 426(E) dated 19th May, 2010, read with corrigendum G.S.R. 263(E), dated 
30th March, 2011, corrigendum G.S.R. 733(E), dated 29th September, 2011, corrigendum G.S.R. 
270(E), dated 30th March, 2012 and corrigendum G.S.R. 733(E), dated 29th March, 2012 (w.e.f . 1-4-
2013). 
1017. Subs. by G.S.R. 900(E), dated 12th December, 2001 (w.e.f. 12-12-2001). 
1018. 
Item (8) and their entries relating thereto omitted by G.S.R. 329(E) dated 3 rd April, 2017 (w.e.f. 3 -4-
2017) 
1019. Subs. by G.S.R. 826(E), dated 30th October, 2015 (w.e.f. 30-10-2015). 
1020. Subs. by G.S.R. 26(E), dated 19th January, 2006 (w.e.f. 19-1-2006). 
1021. Subs. by G.S.R. 900(E), dated 12th December, 2001 (w.e.f. 12-12-2001). 
1022. Subs. By G.S.R. 317(E) dated 18th April, 2019, for paragraph (2) (w.e.f. 22-4-2019). 
1023. 
Subs. By G.S.R. 317(E) dated 18 th April, 2019, for “conspicuous red and vertical line on the left side 
running throughout the body of the label which shall not be less than 1mm in width and” (w.e.f. 22 -4-
2019). 
1024. Ins. by G.S.R. 101(E) dated 18th February, 2011 (w.e.f. 18-2-2011). 
1025. Ins. by G.S.R. 900(E), dated 12th December, 2001 (w.e.f. 12-12-2001). 
1026. Ins. by G.S.R. 900(E), dated 12th December, 2001 (w.e.f. 12-12-2001). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1027. Subs. By G.S.R. 317(E) dated 18th April, 2019, for paragraph (2) (w.e.f. 22-4-2019). 
1028. 
Subs. By G.S.R. 317(E) dated 18 th April, 2019, for “conspicuous red and vertical line on the left side 
running throughout the body of the label which shall not be less than 1mm in width and” (w.e.f. 22 -4-
2019). 
1029. Ins. by G.S.R. 101(E) dated 18th February, 2011 (w.e.f. 18-2-2011). 
1030. Ins. by G.S.R. 900(E), dated 12th December, 2001 (w.e.f. 12-12-2001). 
1031. Ins. By G.S.R. 73(E) dated 31st January, 2003 (w.e.f. 31-1-2003). 
1032. Ins. By G.S.R. 73(E) dated 31st January, 2003 (w.e.f. 31-1-2003). 
1033. Ins. By G.S.R. 73(E) dated 31st January, 2003 (w.e.f. 31-1-2003). 
1034. Ins. By G.S.R. 73(E) dated 31st January, 2003 (w.e.f. 31-1-2003). 
1035. Ins. by G.S.R. 828(E) dated 6th November, 2019 (w.e.f. 6-11-2019) 
1036. Subs. By G.S.R. 478(E) dated 7th August, 1998 (w.e.f. 7-8-1998). 
1037. 
The words “III. Cosmetics Rupees 400 -1500 (The exact amount of the fee shall be determined by the 
Director of Laboratory or the Government analyst, as the case may be .)” omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), 
Dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020). 
1038. 
Item "V" relating to "Homeopathic Medicines" and the entries relati ng thereto omitted by G.S.R. 
202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021 (w.e.f. 23-3-2021). 
1039. Clause (2) omitted by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021 (w.e.f. 23 -3-2021). 
1040. Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for Schedule B(1) (w.e.f. 23-3-2021). 
1041. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-30/47-A, dated 5th January, 1950. 
1042. Subs. by Notification No. F.1-8/60-D, dated 31st August, 1960. 
1043. Subs. by G.S.R. 487(E) dated 2nd July, 1984 (w.e.f. 2-7-1984). 
1044. Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-14/68-D (S.O. 3869), dated 26th October, 1968 (w.e.f. 2-11-1988) 
1045. Subs. by Notification No. F.1-8/60-D, dated 31st August, 1960. 
1046. Ins. By G.S.R. 1242(E) dated 17th September, 1976 (w.e.f. 6-10-1979). 
1047. Ins. by G.S.R. 109(E), dated 22nd February, 1994 (w.e.f. 22-2-1994). 
1048. Amended by Notification No. F. 1-22/59-D, dated 9th April, 1960. 
1049. Subs, by G.S.R. 487(E), dated 2nd July, 1984 (w.e.f. 2-7-1984). 
1050. Ins. By G.S.R. 600(E) dated 27th August, 2002 (w.e.f. 1-9-2002). 
1051. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 360(E), dated 10th April, 2018 for entry under item 1 "Substances not intended for 
medical use" (w.e.f. 10-4-2018). 
1052. Ins. by G.S.R. 724(E), dated 7th November, 2013 (w.e.f. 7-11-2013). 
1053. 
Serial Nos. 2 and 3 omitted by Notification No. F. 1 -6/62-D (S.O. 2889), dated 2nd July, 1969 (w.e.f. 
19-7-1969). 
1054. Serial No. 4 Omitted by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 1-1-2003). 
1055. Amended by Notification No. F. 1-53/55-D, dated 7th January, 1957. 
1056. Amended by G.S.R. 19, dated 15th December, 1977 (w.e.f. 7-1-1978). 
1057. Ins. by G.S.R. 528(E), dated 8th July, 2003 (w.e.f. 8-7-2003). 
1058. The words "cosmetics" omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). 
1059. Ins. by G.S.R. 690(E), dated 25th September, 2014 (w.e.f. 25-9-2014). 
1060. Ins. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001 (w.e.f. 1-1-2003). 
1061. Subs. by G.S.R. 897(E), dated 21st September, 2016, for sub-item 2.3 (w.e.f. 21-9-2016). 
1062. Ins. by G.S.R. 35(E), dated 20th January, 2005 (w.e.f. 20-1-2005) 
1063. Subs. by G.S.R. 897(E), dated 21st September, 2016, for sub-item 2.3 (w.e.f. 21-9-2016). 
1064. Ins. by G.S.R. 35(E), dated 20th January, 2005 (w.e.f. 20-1-2005) 
1065. 
Schedule D (III) omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 20 20 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020). Earlier it 
was inserted by G.S.R. 426(E), dated 19th May, 2010, read with corrigendum G.S.R. 263(E), dated 
30th March, 2011, corrigendum G.S.R. 733(E), dated 29th September, 2011, corrigendum G.S.R. 
270(E), dated 30th March, 2012 an d corrigendum G.S.R. 733(E), dated 29th September, 2012 (w.e.f. 
1-4-2013). 
1066. Schedule E omitted by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
1067. Subs. by G.S.R. 683(E), dated 19th August, 2010, for SCHEDULE E(1) (w.e.f. 19-8-2010). 
1068. 
Part I to Part XIIA omitted by G.S.R. 663(E), dated 3rd July, 1992 (w.e.f. 3 -7-1992) corrected vide 
corrigendum G.S.R. 27(E), dated 22nd January, 1993. 
1069. 
Part XIIB and Part XIIC subs, by G.S.R. 245(E), dated 5th April, 1999 (w.e.f. 5 -4-1999), previously 
Part XIIB and Part XIIC, were substituted for Part XIIB by G.S.R. 28(E), dated 22nd January, 1992 
(w.e.f.22-1-1992) and before that Par t XIIB was added by Notification No. F 1 -17/67-D, 24th June, 
1967. 
1070. Note: 2nd Amendment Rules, 1999 (w.e.f. 5-4-1999). 
1071. Ins. by G.S.R. 101(E) dated 18th February, 2011 (w.e.f. 18-2-2011). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1072. Subs. by G.S.R. 40(E), dated 29th January, 2001 (w.e.f. 1-6-2001). 
1073. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 733(E), dated 21st December, 2005, for “ELISA or RPHA test kits for Hepatitis and 
HIV I & II.” (w.e.f. 21-12-2005). 
1074. Subs. by G.S.R. 40(E), dated 29th January, 2001 (w.e.f. 1-6-2001). 
1075. Subs. by G.S.R. 40(E), dated 29th January, 2001 (w.e.f. 1-6-2001). 
1076. Ins. by G.S.R. 328(E), dated 3rd April, 2017 (w.e.f. 3-4-2017). 
1077. Subs. by G.S.R. 40(E), dated 29th January, 2001 (w.e.f. 1-6-2001). 
1078. Subs. by G.S.R. 40(E), dated 29th January, 2001 (w.e.f. 1-6-2001). 
1079. Subs. by G.S.R. 40(E), dated 29th January, 2001 (w.e.f. 1-6-2001). 
1080. Subs. by G.S.R. 40(E), dated 29th January, 2001 (w.e.f. 1-6-2001). 
1081. Subs. by G.S.R. 40(E), dated 29th January, 2001 (w.e.f. 1-6-2001). 
1082. Subs. by G.S.R. 40(E), dated 29th January, 2001 (w.e.f. 1-6-2001). 
1083. Part XIID inserted by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 201 1 (w.e.f. 27-12-2011). 
1084. Renumbered by Notification No. F. 18-1/46, dated 18th June, 1948. 
1085. Subs. by G.S.R. 19, dated 15th December, 1977 (w.e.f. 7-1-1978). 
1086. Added by Notification No. F. 1-6/62-D (S.O. 2889), dated 2nd July, 1969 (w.e.f. 19-7-1969). 
1087. Ins. by G.S.R. 659(E), dated 31st August, 1994 (w.e.f. 31-8-1994). 
1088. Subs. by G.S.R. 659(E), dated 31st August, 1994 (w.e.f. 31-8-1994). 
1089. Ins. by G.S.R. 659(E), dated 31st August, 1994 (w.e.f. 31-8-1994). 
1090. Ins. by G.S.R. 659(E), dated 31st August, 1994 (w.e.f. 31-8-1994). 
1091. Ins. by G.S.R. 659(E), dated 31st August, 1994 (w.e.f. 31-8-1994). 
1092. Subs. by G.S.R. 659(E), dated 31st August, 1994 (w.e.f. 31-8-1994). 
1093. Ins. by G.S.R. 659(E), dated 31st August, 1994 (w.e.f. 31-8-1994). 
1094. Subs. by G.S.R. 659(E), dated 31st August, 1994 (w.e.f. 31-8-1994). 
1095. Ins. by G.S.R. 659(E), dated 31st August, 1994 (w.e.f. 31-8-1994). 
1096. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 659(E), dated 31st August, 1994 (w.e.f 31 -8-1994). 
1097. Ins. by G.S.R. 659(E), dated 31st August, 1994 (w.e.f. 31-8-1994). 
1098. Subs. by G.S.R. 659(E), dated 31st August, 1994 (w.e.f. 31-8-1994). 
1099. Ins. by G.S.R. 659(E), dated 31st August, 1994 (w.e.f. 31-8-1994). 
1100. Subs. by G.S.R. 647(E), dated 28th October, 1998 (w.e.f. 28-10-1998). 
1101. Ins. by G.S.R. 318(E), dated 1st May, 1985 (w.e.f. 1-5-1985). 
1102. Ins. by G.S.R. 1115(E), dated 30th September, 1986 (w.e.f. 30-9-1986). 
1103. Added by Notification No. F. 1-13/60-D (S.O. 23), dated 23rd December, 1969 (w.e.f. 3-1-1970). 
1104. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
1105. Ins. By G.S.R. 626(E) dated 2nd July, 1987 (w.e.f. 2-7-1987). 
1106. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
1107. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
1108. Subs. by G.S.R 160(E) dated 16th March, 2006 (w.e.f.16-3-2006). 
1109. 
Entry No. 15 (relating to Alprazolam) omitted by G.S.R. 588(E) dated 30 th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27 -2-
2014) 
1110. 
Entries No. 92 to 98 (relating to Cefdinir, Cefepime Hydrochloride, Cefetamet Pivoxil, Cefpirome, 
Cefodoxime Proxetil, Ceftazidime Pentahydrate, Cefitzoxime Sodium) omitted by G.S.R. 588(E) dated 
30th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27-2-2014). 
1111. 
Entries No. 105 and 147 (relating to Chlordiazepoxide and Diazepam) omitted by G.S.R. 588(E) dated 
30th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27-2-2014). 
1112. 
Entries No. 107 (relating to Chlorpheniramine Maleate) and 145 (relating to D extromethorphan 
Hydrobromide) omitted by G.S.R. 602(E) dated 19 th July, 2010 (w.e.f. 19-7-2010). 
1113. 
Entries No. 123 and 132 (relating to Clofazimine and Codeine) omitted by G.S.R. 588(E) dated 30 th 
August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27-2-2014). 
1114. 
Entry No. 156 (relating to Diphenoxylate, its Salts) omitted by G.S.R. 588(E) dated 30 th August, 2013 
(w.e.f. 27-2-2014) 
1115. 
Entries No. 184, 187 and 287 (relating to Ethambutol Hydro chloride, Ethionamide and Levofloxacin) 
omitted by G.S.R. 588(E) dated 30th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27-2-2014). 
1116. 
Serial No. 269 (Ketamine Hrydrochloride) omitted by G.S.R. 724(E) dated 7 th November, 2013 (w.e.f. 
7-11-2013). 
1117. 
Entries No. 311, 324, 339, 360, 392 and 418 (relating to Meropenam, Midazolam, Moxifloxacin, 
Nitrazepam, Pentazocine and Pyrazinamide) omitted by G.S.R. 588(E) dated 30 th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 
27-2-2014) 
1118. 
Entry No. 382 (relating to Oxytocin) omitted by G.S.R. 795(E) dated 21 st August, 2018 (w.e.f. 1 -9-
2018). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1119. 
Entries No. 466, 493, 507 and 534 (relating to Sparfloxacin, Thiacetazone, Tramadol Hydrochloride 
and Zolpidem) omitted by G.S.R. 588(E) dated 30 th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27-2-2014). 
1120. Ins. By G.S.R. 303(E) dated 30th March, 2017 (w.e.f. 30-3-2017). 
1121. Ins. By G.S.R. 277(E) dated 23rd March, 2018 (w.e.f.23-3-2018). 
1122. Ins. By G.S.R. 408(E) dated 26th April, 2018 (w.e.f.1-11-2018). 
1123. Subs. by G.S.R. 186(E) dated 6th March, 2019, for “steroids” (w.e.f.1-4-2019). 
1124. Ins. By G.S.R. 153(E) dated 26th February, 2019 (w.e.f. 26-2-2019). 
1125. Ins. by G.S.R. 588(E) dated 30th August, 2013 (w.e.f. 27-2-2014) 
1126. Ins. by G.S.R. 795(E) dated 21st August, 2018 (w.e.f. 1-9-2018). 
1127. Ins. By G.S.R. 258(E) dated 7th April, 2021 (w.e.f. 1-11-2021). 
1128. Schedule I omitted by G.S.R. 462(E) dated 22 nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
1129. Subs. by G.S.R. 21(E) dated 11th January, 1996 (w.e.f. 11-1-1996). 
1130. Item 2 omitted by Notification No. F. 1-56/47-D dated 16th January, 1950. 
1131. Added by Notification No. F.1-2/47-D dated 13th February, 1950. 
1132. Subs. by Notification No. F.1-22/59-D, dated 9th April, 1960. 
1133. 
Items 3 and 4 omitted by Notification No. F. 1 -6/62-d (S.O. 2889) dated 2 nd July, 1960 ( w.e.f. 19-7-
1969). 
1134. Subs. by G.S.R. 1074(E), dated 19th August, 1978. 
1135. Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E) dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
1136. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
1137. Ins. By G.S.R. 460(E), dated 20th June, 1984 (w.e.f. 20-6-1984). 
1138. Ins. by G.S.R. 592(E), dated 13th August, 2008 (w.e.f. 13-8-2008). 
1139. Added by Notification No. F. 1-22/59-D, dated 9th April, 1960. 
1140. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 812(E), dated 14 th November, 1994 (w.e.f.14-11-1994). 
1141. Ins. by G.S.R. 648(E), dated 16th September, 2002 (w.e.f. 1-10-2002). 
1142. Ins. by G.S.R. 592(E), dated 13th August, 2008 (w.e.f. 13-8-2008). 
1143. Ins. By G.S.R. 909(E) dated 20th December, 2001 (w.e.f. 20-12-2001). 
1144. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "Blood Bank" (w.e.f. 11-3-2020). 
1145. Condition (2) omitted by G.S.R. 328(E), dated 3rd April, 2017 (w.e.f. 3 -4-2017). 
1146. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "Blood Bank" (w.e.f. 11-3-2020). 
1147. Item 6 omitted by G.S.R. 681(E), dated 5th December, 1980 (w.e.f. 5-12-1980). 
1148. Item 8 omitted by G.S.R. 1185(E) dated 18 th August, 1964 (w.e.f. 22-8-1964) 
1149. Added by Notification No. F. 1-19/50-D.S., dated 30th March, 1953. 
1150. Added by Notification No. DR/Sch. Ddk/F. 1-40/54-D.S., dated 27th January, 1955. 
1151. Omitted by G.S.R. 665(E), dated 6th May, 1977 (w.e.f. 28-5-1977). 
1152. Subs, by G.S.R. 19(E), dated 15th December, 1977 (w.e.f. 7-1-1978). 
1153. 
Item 11 omitted by Notification No. F. 1 -36/64-D (G.S.R. 1188(E)), dated 17th August, 1964 (w.e.f. 
22-8-1964). 
1154. Amended by Notification No. F. 1-20/60-D (S.O. 400(E)), dated 24th January, 1964 (w.e.f. 2-1-1964). 
1155. Added by G.S.R. 926(E), dated 24th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16-7-1977). 
1156. Added by Notification No, F.1-19/59-D, dated 13th June, 1961. 
1157. Subs. by S.O. 2139(E), dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
1158. Subs, by G.S.R. 1060(E), 5th September, 1986, (w.e.f. 5-9-1986). 
1159. Subs, by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
1160. Added by Notification No. 1-39/61-D (S.O. 1057), dated 23rd March, 1964 (w.e.f. 28-3-1964). 
1161. Added by G.S.R. 926(E), dated 24th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16-7-1977). 
1162. Ins. G.S.R. 784(E), dated 28th August, 1989 (w.e.f. 28-8-1989). 
1163. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 730(E), dated 10th December, 1991 (w.e.f. 10 -12-1991) corrected vide corrigendum 
G.S.R. 63(E), dated 20th January, 1992. 
1164. Ins. by G.S.R. 648(E), dated 16th September, 2002 (w.e.f. 1-10-2002). 
1165. 
The words "16. Cosmetics —The provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the rules made thereunder, 
which require t hem to be covered by a licence for sale provided that the cosmetics sold, if of Indian 
origin, are manufactured by licensed manufacturers." omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 
2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). Earlier it was added by Notification No. F. 1-36/64-D (G.S.R. 1183(E)), 
dated 17th August, 1964 (w.e.f. 22-8-1964). 
1166. Added by Notification No. 1-21/63-D (G.S.R. 70(E)), dated 4th January, 1965 (w.e.f. 9-1-1965). 
1167. Item 18 omitted by G.S.R. 1594(E), dated 28th October, 1976 (w.e.f. 13-11-1976). 
1168. Added by S.O. 2139(E), dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
1169. Added by G.S.R. 926, dated 24th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16-7-1977). 
1170. Added by G.S.R. 697(E), dated 11th November, 1977 (w.e.f. 11 -11-1977). 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
1171. Ins. by G.S.R. 1241, dated 15th September, 1979 (w.e.f. 6-10-1979). 
1172. Ins. by G.S.R. 540(E), dated 22nd September, 1980 (w.e.f. 22-9-1980). 
1173. Subs. by G.S.R. 140(E), dated 26-2-2021 for "and (iv) Anganwadi Workers" (w.e.f. 26-2-2021). 
1174. Ins. by G.S.R. 680(E), dated 5th December, 1980 (w.e.f. 5-12-1980). 
1175. Subs, by G.S.R. 1060(E), 5th September, 1989, (w.e.f. 5-9-1989). 
1176. Ins. by G.S.R. 371(E) dated 24th March, 1988 (w.e.f. 24-3-1988). 
1177. Ins. By G.S.R. 677(E) dated 2nd June, 1988 (w.e.f. 2-6-1988). 
1178. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 408(E), dated 27th April, 2018, for entries under column (1) of Serial No. 27 (w.e.f. 1 -
11-2018). Entries under column (1), before substitution, stood as under: 
"Oral Rehydration Salts (Manufactured as per the following formula):— 
• Sodium Chloride 3.5 g/litre: 
• Trisodium citrate dihydrate 2.9 g/litre. 
• Potassium Chloride 1.5 g/litre. 
May be replaced by Sodium bicarbona te (Sodium hydrogen Carbonate) 2.5 g/litre, when citrate salt is 
not available.". 
1179. Ins. by G.S.R. 753(E), dated 4th November, 1999 (w.e.f. 4-11-1999). 
1180. Ins. by G.S.R. 6(E), dated 4th January, 2001 (w.e.f. 4-1-2001). 
1181. Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "Blood Bank" (w.e.f. 11 -3-2020). 
1182. Subs. by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017, for Serial No. 31 (w. e.f. 10-11-2017). 
1183. Ins. by G.S.R. 648(E) dated 16th September, 2002 (w.e.f. 1-10-2002). 
1184. Ins. by G.S.R. 549(E) dated 16th July, 2003 (w.e.f. 16-7-2003). 
1185. Ins. By G.S.R. 101(E) dated 18th February, 2011 (w.e.f. 18-2-2011). 
1186. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 385(E), dated 19th April, 2018, for Serial No. 34 (w.e.f. 19 -4-2018). Earlier it was 
inserted by G.S.R. 734(E), dated 21st December, 2005 (w.e.f. 21-12-2005). 
1187. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 76(E), dated 31st January, 2017, for Serial No. 35 and 35 and entries relating thereto 
(w.e.f. 31-1-2017). Earlier Serial No. 35 and 35 were inserted by G.S.R. 917(E), dated 22nd Dece mber, 
2009 (w.e.f. 22 -12-2009) and G.S.R. 690(E), dated 25th September, 2014 (w.e.f. 25 -9-2014) 
respectively and amended by G.S.R. 107(E), dated 17th February, 2015 (w.e.f. 17 -2-2015). 
1188. Ins. by G.S.R 47(E), dated 25th January, 2019 (w.e.f. 25-1-2019). 
1189. Schedule L omitted by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
1190. Ins. by G.S.R 780(E), dated 10th November, 2008 (w.e.f. 1-11-2010). 
1191. Subs. by G.S.R 922(E) dated 28.12.2023(w.e.f. 28.12.2023). 
1192. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "and no other manufacturing activity shall be 
undertaken therein" (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1193. Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "creation of recesses" (w.e.f. 30 -6-2005). 
1194. Subs, by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "clean towels, hand dryers" (w.e.f. 30 -6-2005). 
1195. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "The effective segregation of these areas shall be 
demonstrated with adequate records of maintenance and services" (w.e.f. 30 -6-2005). 
1196. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "There shall be segregated enclosed areas, secured 
for recalled or rejected material and for such material which are to be processed or recovered" (w.e.f. 
30-6-2005). 
1197. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "such that finished batch of a drug can be traced to 
the retail level" (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1198. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "Grade C background and if necessary, under 
Laminar Air Flow work station" (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1199. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "shall not exceed 27 degree centigrade and relative 
humidity 55% respectively" (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1200. Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "TABLE I" (w.e.f. 30 -6-2005). 
1201. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "Grade A corresponds with Class 100 or M 3.5 or 
ISO class 5; Grade B with class 1000 or M 4.5 or ISO Class 6" (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1202. Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "usually at risk" (w.e.f. 30 -6-2005). 
1203. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 431( E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "Where alcohol or Isopropyl alcohol is used for 
dilution of disinfectants for use as hand sprays, the preparation of the same shall be done in the bulk 
preparation area and the diluted solution membrane -filtered into suitable sterile containers held in 
aseptic area" (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1204. 
Sub-paragraph "8.9 Steam coming in contact with the product, primary containers and other product 
contact surfaces hall be sterile and pyrogen free. The steam condensate shall meet microbiological 
specification of not more than 10 cfu per 100 ml. The condensate shall also meet IP specification for 
Water for Injection and shall have an endotoxin level of not more than 0.25 EU/ml. There shall be a 
suitable schedul e for the monitoring of steam quality." omitted by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2005 (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1205. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "Where the facilities are designed to provide 
special environm ental conditions of pressure differentials between rooms, these conditions shall be 
regularly monitored and any specification results brought to the immediate attention of the Production 
and Quality Assurance departments which shall be immediately attended to" (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1206. Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1207. Ins. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1208. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "Manufacturing personnel shall wear non -fiber 
shedding clothing to prevent contamination of the products" (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1209. 
The words "Area shall be ventilated." omitted by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005 (w.e.f. 30 -6-
2005). 
1210. Subs, by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "No rags or dusters" (w.e.f. 30 -6-2005). 
1211. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 431(E), d ated 30th June, 2005, for "Mixing and storage tanks (Stainless steel)" (w.e.f. 
30-6-2005). 
1212. Subs, by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "Jacketted Kettle” (w.e.f. 30 -6-2005). 
1213. 
The w ords "(Electrically operated)" omitted by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005 (w.e.f. 30 -6-
2005) 
1214. Added by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005 (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1215. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 431(E) , dated 30th June, 2005, for "Mixing and storage tanks (Stainless steel)" (w.e.f. 
30-6-2005). 
1216. Added by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005 (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1217. Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "tablet machine" (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1218. Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "Granulator" (w.e.f. 30 -6-2005). 
1219. Subs. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005, for "Dissolution test apparatus" (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1220. Ins. by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005 (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1221. Added by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005 (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1222. Added by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005 (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1223. The words "/ dispersible" omitted by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005 (w.e.f. 30 -6-2005) 
1224. 
The words "(electrically operated)" omitted by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005 (w.e.f. 30 -6-
2005) 
1225. Added by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005 (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1226. 
The words "(preferably semi automatic or automatic filling machines)" omitted by G.S.R. 431(E), 
dated 30th June, 2005 (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1227. Added by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005 (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1228. Added by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005 (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1229. Added by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005 (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1230. Added by G.S.R. 431(E), dated 30th June, 2005 (w.e.f. 30-6-2005). 
1231. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 678(E) dated 31 st October, 2006, for Schedule MI (w.e.f. 31 -10-2006). Earlier 
Schedule MI was inserted by G.S.R. 507(E) dated 12 th June, 1987 (w.e.f.12-6-1987) 
1232. The words "or outside" omitted by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017 (w.e.f. 10 -11-2017). 
1233. Subs by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017, for "origins" (w.e.f. 10 -11-2017). 
1234. 
Subs by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017, for "stainless steel of grade 304" (w.e.f. 10 -11-
2017). 
1235. 
Subs by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017, for "shall be separate and shall be 55 square 
meters for each for basic installations" (w.e.f. 10-11-2017). 
1236. Subs. by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017, for "neutral glass" (w.e.f. 10 -11-2017). 
1237. Ins. by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017 (w.e.f. 10-11-2017). 
1238. Ins. by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017 (w.e.f. 10-11-2017). 
1239. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017, for item “(ii) Dissecting m icroscope” (w.e.f. 10-
11-2017). 
1240. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017, for item “(iv) the materials shall be free of 
inorganic or organic foreign matter;” (w.e.f. 10-11-2017). 
1241. 
The words "and should not be more than six months old" omitted by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th 
November, 2017 (w.e.f. 10-11-2017). 
1242. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017, for item “(i) a small twig of the pla nt with 
leaves shall be available if the part used is bark of the plant;” (w.e.f. 10-11-2017). 
1243. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017, for item “(vi) the materials shall be in open 
mesh bags or in suitable material which permits the passage of air inside;” (w.e.f. 10-11-2017). 
1244. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017, for item “(vii) each consignment of the material 
shall be accompanied by a statement of the supplier ’s name; name of the plant with description of the 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
part supplied; the pharmacopeial reference, place of collection/ harvest, date and time of collection and 
packaging and weight.” (w.e.f. 10-11-2017). 
1245. Sub-paragraph 6.4 omitted by G.S.R. 1380(E) dated 10th November, 2017 (w.e.f. 10-11-2017). 
1246. Subs. by G.S.R. 1380(E), dated 10th November, 2017, for "date of manufacture" (w.e.f. 10 -11-2017). 
1247. 
Schedule M-II omitted by G.S.R. 763(E) dated 15 th December, 2020 (w.e.f.15-12-2020). Earlier it was 
inserted by G.S.R. 723(E) dated 11th August, 1992 (w.e.f. 11-8-1992). 
1248. 
Subs. By. G.S.R. 640(E) dated 29 th June, 2016, (w.e.f. 29 -62016). Earlier Schedule M-III was inserted 
by G.S.R. 109(E) dated 22nd February, 1994 (w.e.f.22-2-1994). 
1249. Subs. by S.O. 2139, dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972). 
1250. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 1243, dated 19th September, 1979, for Schedule O (w.e.f. 6 -10-1979). Earlier 
Schedule O was added by Notification No. F. 1-20/60-D, dated 24th January, 1964. 
1251. Subs. by G.S.R. 735(E), dated 21st December, 2005, for Part I (w.e.f. 21-12-2005). 
1252. 
Subs. By G.S.R. 17(E) dated 7 th January 1986, for Schedule P (w.e.f.7 -1-1986) corrected vide 
corrigendum G.S.R. 1059(E) dated 5 th September, 1986. Earlier Schedule P was added by Notification 
no. 1-7/62-D, dated 11th May, 1964. 
1253. Subs. By G.S.R. 250(E) dated 4th April, 2002 (w.e.f. 4-4-2002). 
1254. Subs. by G.S.R. 626(E), dated 14th October, 1991 (w.e.f. 14-10-1991). 
1255. Ins. By G.S.R. 215(E) dated 19th March, 1999 (w.e.f. 19-3-1999). 
1256. Subs. by G.S.R. 626(E), dated 14th October, 1991 (w.e.f. 14-10-1991). 
1257. Subs. by G.S.R. 26(E), dated 19th January, 2006 (w.e.f. 19-1-2006). 
1258. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 174(E), dated 16th March, 2005, for serial No. "2. BCG Vaccine 14 in cold place" 
(w.e.f. 16-3-2005). 
1259. Ins. By G.S.R. 215(E) dated 19th March, 1999 (w.e.f. 19-3-1999). 
1260. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 174(E), dated 16th March, 2005, for serial No. "1. Adrenaline for Injection 12 
In cold place" (w.e.f. 16-3-2005). 
1261. Ins. by G.S.R. 796(E), dated 1st October, 1992 (w.e.f. 1-10-1993). 
1262. Ins. by G.S.R. 753(E), dated 4th November, 1999 (w.e.f. 4-11-1999). 
1263. 
Schedule Q omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). Earlier 
Schedule Q was added by Notification No. F. 1 -36/64-D (G.S.R. 1183(E)), dated 17th August, 1964 
(w.e.f. 22 -8-1964) and amended by G.S.R. 11(E), dated 7th January, 1991 (w.e.f. 7 -11-1991) , by 
G.S.R. 811(E), dated 14th November, 1994 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994) and by G.S.R. 203(E), dated 18th 
March, 2015 (w.e.f. 18-3-2015). 
1264. 
Added by Notification no. 1-28/65-D, dated 8th March, 1966 and subs. by G.S.R. 495(E) dated 9 th June, 
1995 (w.e.f. 9-6-1995). 
1265. Subs. by G.S.R. 353(E) dated 26th April, 2000 (w.e.f. 26-4-2000). 
1266. Subs. by G.S.R. 353(E) dated 26th April, 2000 (w.e.f. 26-4-2000). 
1267. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 690(E), dated 25th Se ptember, 2014 (w.e.f. 25 -9-2014). Earlier SCHEDULE R1 was 
inserted by G.S.R. 109(E) dated 22nf February, 1994 (w.e.f. 22-2-1994). 
1268. 
Schedule S omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). Earlier 
Schedule S was inserted by G.S.R. 510(E) dated 26 th July, 1982 (w.e.f. 26 -7-1982) and omitted by 
G.S.R. 1098(E) dated 9 th July, 1976 (w.e.f. 24 -7-1976) and amended by G.S.R. 731(E) dated 23 rd 
August , 1990 (w.e.f. 23 -8-1990), by G.S.R. 673(E) dated 27 th October, 1993 (w.e.f.27 -10-1993), by 
G.S.R. 553(E) dated 20 th July, 1995 (w.e.f. 20 -7-1995), by G.S.R. 592(E) dated 13 th August, 2008 
(w.e.f. 13 -8-2008), by G.S.R. 724(E) dated 7 th November, 2013 (w.e.f. 7 -11-2013) and by G.S.R. 
203(E) dated 18th March, 2015 (w.e.f. 18-3-2015). 
1269. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 560(E) dated 7 th March, 2003 (w.e.f. 7 -3-2003). Earlier Schedule T was added by 
Notification No. 1-23/67-D, dated 2nd February, 1970. 
1270. 
Subs. by G.S. R. 463(E) dated 8 th July, 2005 and corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R. 705(E) dated 29 -
11-2005. 
1271. 
Ins. By G.S.R. 157(E) dated 4 th March, 2009 read with corrigendum G.S.R. 338(E) dated 15 th April, 
2010 (w.e.f. 9-3-2009) 
1272. Subs. by corrigendum G.S.R. 338(E) dated 15 th April, 2010, for “may be”. 
1273. Subs. by corrigendum G.S.R. 338(E) dated 15 th April, 2010, for “or e-mail or”. 
1274. Subs. by corrigendum G.S.R. 338(E) dated 15 th April, 2010, for “may be”. 
1275. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 463(E) dated 8 th July, 2005 and corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R. 705(E) dated 29 -
11-2005. 
1276. Ins. By G.S.R. 512(E) dated 9th July, 2008 (w.e.f. 9-7-2008). 
1277. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 735(E) dated 24 th June, 1988, for Schedule O (w.e.f. 26 -6-1988). Earlier Schedule O 
was added by Notification No. X. 20.64-D, dated 26th October, 1968. 
1278. Schedule U (1) omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15 -12-2020). Earlier 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
Schedule U (1) was added by G.S.R. 1594, dated 28th October, 1976, (w.e.f. 13 -11-1976). 
1279. Added by G.S.R. 665, dated 6th May, 1977 (w.e.f. 28-5-1977). 
1280. 
Omitted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 22nd January, 1992 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1992). Earlier Paragraphs 1 and 3 
were inserted by G.S.R. 331(E), dated 8th May, 1984 (w.e.f. 8-5-1984). 
1281. Added by G.S.R. 930, dated 13th July, 1978 (w.e.f. 2-7-1978). 
1282. Ins. by G.S.R. 792 (E), dated 17th September, 1987 (w.e.f. 17-9-1987). 
1283. Subs, by G.S.R. 917(E), dated 22nd December, 2009, for "mg" (w.e.f. 22-12-2009). 
1284. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 59(E) dated 22 nd January, 1992 (w.e.f. 22-1-1992) 
1285. 
Schedule W omitted by G.S.R. 94(E) d ated 8th May, 2000 (w.e.f. 8 -5-2000). Earlier Schedule W was 
inserted by G.S.R. 27(E) dated 17th January, 1981 (w.e.f 1-8-1981). 
1286. Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982). 
1287. Ins. by G.S.R. 724(E), dated 7th November, 2013 (w.e.f. 7-11-2013). 
1288. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 647(E), dated 28th October, 1998 (w.e.f. 28 -10-1998). 
1289. Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 673(E), dated 27th October, 1993 (w.e.f. 27-10-1993). 
1290. Subs. by G.S.R. 32(E), dated 20th January, 2005, for Schedule Y (w.e.f. 20-01-2005). 
1291. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th Dece mber, 2014, for clause (iv) (w.e.f. 12 -6-2015). Earlier clause 
(iv) was inserted by G.S.R. 53(E), dated 30th January, 2013 (w.e.f. 30 -1-2013). Clause (iv), before 
substitution, stood as under: 
"(iv) In case of serious adverse event of death occurring to th e clinical trial subject, the Ethics 
Committee shall forward it's report on the serious adverse event of death/after due analysis, along with 
its opinion on the financial compensation, ii any, to be paid by the Sponsor or his representative, 
whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority as defined under rule 21(b) for 
conducting the clinical trial, to the Chairman of the Expert Committee constituted by the Licensing 
Authority under Appendix XII with a copy of the report to the Licensing Aut hority within twenty one 
calendar days of the occurrence of the serious adverse event of death. In case of serious adverse event, 
other than death occurring to the clinical trial subject, the Ethics Committee shall forward its report on 
the serious adverse event after due analysis along with its opinion on the financial compensation, if 
any, to be paid by the Sponsor or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission from the 
Licensing Authority for conducting the clinical trial, to the Licensing Auth ority within twenty one 
calendar days or the occurrence of the serious adverse event.” 
1292. Ins. by G.S.R. 53(E), dated 30th January, 2013 (w.e.f. 30-1-2013). 
1293. Ins. by G.S.R. 53(E), dated 30th January, 2013 (w.e.f. 30-1-2013). 
1294. 
Sub-para (3) renumbered as sub -para, (3)(i) thereof by G.S.R. 53(E) dated 30 th January, 2013 (w.e.f. 
30-1-2013) 
1295. Certain words substituted by G.S.R. 53(E), dated 30th January, 2013 (w.e.f. 30-1-2013). 
1296. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014, for "The report of the serious adverse event of 
death, after due analysis shall be forwarded by the Investigator to Chair man of the Ethics Committee 
and Chairman of the Expert Committee constituted by the Licensing Authority under Appendix XII 
with a copy of the report to the Licensing Authority and the head of the Institution where the trial nas 
been conducted within ten ca lendar days of occurrence of the serious adverse event of death. The 
report of the serious adverse event 'other than death, after due analysis shall be forwarded to the 
Licensing Authority, Chairman of the Ethics Committee and the head of the Institution w here the trial 
has been conducted within ten calendar days of occurrence of the serious adverse event." (w.e.f. 12 -6-
2015). 
1297. Ins. By G.S.R. 53(E), dated 30th January, 2013 (w.e.f. 30-1-2013). 
1298. Ins. by G.S.R. 611(E), dated 31st July, 2015 (w.e.f. 31-7-2015). 
1299. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014, for clause (iv) (w.e.f. 12 -6-2015). Earlier clause 
(iv) was inserted by G.S.R. 53(E), dated 30th Jan uary, 2013 (w.e.f. 30 -1-2013). Clause (iv), before 
substitution, stood as under: 
"(iv) In case of serious adverse event of death occurring to the clinical trial subject, the Ethics 
Committee shall forward it's report on the serious adverse event of death/a fter due analysis, along with 
its opinion on the financial compensation, ii any, to be paid by the Sponsor or his representative, 
whosoever had obtained permission from the Licensing Authority as defined under rule 21(b) for 
conducting the clinical trial, to the Chairman of the Expert Committee constituted by the Licensing 
Authority under Appendix XII with a copy of the report to the Licensing Authority within twenty one 
calendar days of the occurrence of the serious adverse event of death. In case of serio us adverse event, 
other than death occurring to the clinical trial subject, the Ethics Committee shall forward its report on 
the serious adverse event after due analysis along with its opinion on the financial compensation, if 
any, to be paid by the Sponso r or his representative, whosoever had obtained permission from the 
Licensing Authority for conducting the clinical trial, to the Licensing Authority within twenty one 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
calendar days or the occurrence of the serious adverse event. 
1300. Ins. By G.S.R. 53(E), dated 30th January, 2013 (w.e.f. 30-1-2013). 
1301. 
The words "and unexpected" omitted by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014 (w.e.f. 12 -6-
2015). 
1302. Ins. by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014 (w.e.f. 12-6-2015). 
1303. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 287(E) dated 8 th March, 2016, for clause (i) (w.e.f. 8 -3-2016). Paragraph (4) and 
clause (i) relating thereto, before substitution, stood as under: 
“(4) Post Marketing Surveillance .- (i) Subsequent to approval of the product, new drugs should be 
closely monitored for their clinical safety once they are marketed. The applicants shall furnish Periodic 
Safety Update Reports (PSURs) in order to- 
(a) report all the relevant new information from appropriate sources; 
(b) relate these data to patient exposure ; 
(c) summarize the market authorization status in different countries and any significant variations 
related to safety; and 
(d) indicate whether changes should be made to product information in order to optimize the use of the 
product.” 
1304. Ins. by G.S.R. 313(E), dated 16th March, 2016 (w.e.f. 16-3-2016). 
1305. Ins. by G.S.R. 826(E), dated 30th October, 2015 (w.e.f. 30-10-2015). 
1306. Ins. by G.S.R. 918(E), dated 30th November, 2015 (w.e.f. 30-11-2015). 
1307. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 1041(E) dated 4 th November, 2016, for “Daily topical (dermal) app lication of test 
substance in its clinical dosage form should be done.” (w.e.f. 4-11-2016) 
1308. Ins. by G.S.R. 1041(E) dated 4th November, 2016 (w.e.f. 4-11-2016) 
1309. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 287(E) dated 8th March, 2016, for entries under sub -heading “Oral or Parenteral or 
Transdermal” (w.e.f. 8-3-2016) 
1310. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 287(E) dated 8 th March, 2016, for “phase I, II, III in male volunteers/patients” (w.e.f. 
8-3-2016). 
1311. Subs. By G.S.R. 53(E), dated 30th January, 2013, or item no. 9 (w.e.f. 30 -1-2013). 
1312. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014, for clause (a) (w.e.f. 12 -6-2015). Clause (a), 
before substitution, stood as under: 
"(a) In the event of an injury occurring to the clinical trial subject, such subject shall be provided free 
medical management as long as required.". 
1313. Ins. by G.S.R. 611(E), dated 31st July, 2015 (w.e.f. 31-7-2015). 
1314. Ins. By G.S.R. 53(E), dated 30th January, 2013 (w.e.f. 30-1-2013). 
1315. Ins. By G.S.R. 53(E), dated 30th January, 2013 (w.e.f. 30-1-2013). 
1316. Subs. by G.S.R. 72(E), dated 8th February, 2013, for paragraph 1 (w.e.f. 8-2-2013). 
1317. 
Subs. by G.S.R. 72(E), dated 8 th February, 2013, for “2. Format for Approval of Ethics Committee” 
(w.e.f. 8-2-2013). 
1318. Ins. By G.S.R. 53(E), dated 30th January, 2013 (w.e.f. 30-1-2013). 
1319. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014, for clause (a) (w.e.f. 12 -6-2015). Clause (a), 
before substitution, stood as under: 
"(a) In the event of an injury occurring to the clinical trial subject, such subject shall be provided free 
medical management as long as required.". 
1320. Ins. by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014 (w.e.f. 12-6-2015) 
1321. 
The words "and unexpected" omitted by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014 (w.e.f. 12 -6-
2015). 
1322. Ins. by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014 (w.e.f. 12-6-2015) 
1323. 
The words "Chairman of the Expert Committee with a copy of the report to" omitted by G.S.R. 889(E) 
dated 12th December, 2014 (w.e.f. 12-6-2015). 
1324. Subs, by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December 2014, for "ten calendar days" (w.e.f. 12-6-2015). 
1325. 
The words "to the Chairman of the Expert Committee with a copy of the report" omitted by G.S.R. 
889(E) dated 12th December, 2014 (w.e.f. 12-6-2015). 
1326. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014, for "twenty one calendar days" (w.e.f. 12 -6-
2015). 
1327. Ins. by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014 (w.e.f. 12-6-2015) 
1328. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 889 (E), dated 12th December, 2014, for "thirty days of receiving the report from the 
Ethics Committee" (w.e.f. 12-6-2015). 
1329. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014, for "three months of receiving the report of the 
serious adverse event" (w.e.f. 12-6-2015). 
1330. Subs, by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December 2014, for "ten calendar days" (w.e.f. 12 -6-2015). 
1331. Subs, by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014, for "twenty one calendar days" (w.e.f. 12 -6-

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India  of 963 
2015). 
1332. 
Subs, by G.S.R. 889(E), dated 12th December, 2014, for "three months of receiving the report of the 
serious adverse event" (w.e.f. 12-6-2015). 
1333. Ins. By G.S.R. 20(E) dated 18-01-2022 (w.e.f. 01.01.2023) 
1334. Ins. By G.S.R. 30(E) dated 20-01-2022 (w.e.f. 20-01-2022) 
1335. Ins. By G.S.R. 158(E) dated 24-02-2022 (w.e.f. 24-02-2022) 
1336. Ins. By G.S.R. 357(E) dated 18-05-2022 (w.e.f. 01-11-2022) 
1337. Ins. By G.S.R. 502(E) dated 30-06-2022 (w.e.f. 30-06-2022) 
1338. Ins. By G.S.R. 654(E) dated 24-08-2022 (w.e.f. 24-08-2022) 
1339. Ins. By G.S.R. 823(E) dated 17-11-2022 (w.e.f. 01-08-2023) 
1340. Subs. by G.S.R 410(E) dated 02.06.2023 (w.e.f. 02.06.2023). 
1341. Ins. By G.S.R 95(E) dated 05.02.2024 (w.e.f. 05.02.2024). 
1342. G.S.R 216(E) dated 18.03.2024 (w.e.f. 18.03.2024). 
 1343. Subs. by G.S.R 341(E) dated 24.04.2023. 
Error! 
Reference 
source 
not 
found.1344. Omitted by G.S.R 293(E) dated 04.04.2022 (w.e.f. 04.04.2022). 
1345. Omitted by G.S.R 360(E) dated 01.07.2024 (w.e.f. 01.07.2024).