C
Introduction
Key Questions on Patent 
Disclosure Requirements 
for Genetic Resources and 
Traditional Knowledge 
Second edition
2020 Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge 

Key Questions on Patent 
Disclosure Requirements 
for Genetic Resources and 
Traditional Knowledge
Second edition

2
© WIPO, 2020
First edition, 2017
World Intellectual Property Organization 
34, chemin des Colombettes, P.O. Box 18 
CH-1211 Geneva 20, Switzerland
Attribution 3.0 IGO 
(CC BY 3.0 IGO)
Photo credits (clockwise from top left): 
© iStock/Pablo_K, © iStock/mihtiander, 
© iStock/Sproetniek, © iStock/gilaxia.
Printed in Switzerland
The user is allowed to reproduce, distribute, adapt, translate and publicly 
perform this publication, including for commercial purposes, without 
explicit permission, provided that the content is accompanied by an 
acknowledgement that WIPO is the source and that it is clearly indicated 
if changes were made to the original content.
Suggested citation: World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) 
(2017). Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for Genetic 
Resources and Traditional Knowledge, 2 nd edition. Geneva: WIPO.
Adaptation/translation/derivatives should not carry any official emblem 
or logo, unless they have been approved and validated by WIPO. Please 
contact us via the WIPO website to obtain permission. 
For any derivative work, please include the following disclaimer: “The 
Secretariat of WIPO assumes no liability or responsibility with regard to 
the transformation or translation of the original content.”
When content published by WIPO, such as images, graphics, trademarks 
or logos, is attributed to a third party, the user of such content is solely 
responsible for clearing the rights with the right holder(s).
To view a copy of this license, please visit 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/igo/
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout 
this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever 
on the part of WIPO concerning the legal status of any country, territory 
or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers 
or boundaries.
This publication is not intended to reflect the views of the Member States 
or the WIPO Secretariat. 
The mention of specific companies or products of manufacturers does 
not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by WIPO in preference 
to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. 

3
Table of contents
Foreword 4
Preface 5
List of boxes and figures 6
List of acronyms 7
1. Introduction 8
The aims of this study 8
How to use this study 9
2. Background and concept 10
What are patent disclosure requirements 
related to GRs and TK? 10
How do new PDRs related to GRs and 
TK differ from conventional disclosure 
requirements under established patent law 
principles and procedures? 11
What is the relationship between new PDRs 
and ABS obligations? 13
What are the main critiques and opposing views? 13
3. Objectives 14
Why have several countries introduced 
new PDRs related to GRs and TK? 14
4. Complementary and competing interests and 
objectives 17
What interests and objectives may need to be 
balanced when shaping an appropriate 
disclosure obligation? 17
5. Legal nature 20
What is the difference between voluntary and 
compulsory PDRs? 20
6. Formal and substantive requirements 23
What role might the patent office play in 
checking the fulfillment of new formal or 
substantive PDRs? 23
7. Placement 24
Where should new disclosure requirements be 
introduced? 24
Is it possible to introduce new disclosure 
requirements in legislation other than patent 
and/or IP law? 24
8. Subject matter 26
What is the subject matter covered by these 
new PDRs? 26
9. Content 31
What might be the possible content 
of disclosure? 31
10. Geographical scope 33
What is the geographical scope of disclosure? 33
11. Exclusions 35
What exclusions from the material scope of 
application of a new PDR might be envisaged? 35
12. Triggers 36
What relationship or link between the 
subject matter of disclosure and 
the claimed invention will trigger 
the application of a new PDR? 36
13. Remedies and sanctions 39
What kinds of remedies and sanctions are 
available to address issues of non- compliance 
with any new PDRs? 39
14. Evidence 43
What evidence might be submitted in the context 
of new PDR-related compliance mechanisms and 
procedures? 43
15. Standing 44
Who might have a right to take legal action 
for non-compliance with a new PDR? 44
16. Capacity 46
What legal, institutional and policy capacities 
might be needed to implement a new PDR? 46
17. Relationship with other instruments 49
Under the Nagoya Protocol, is there an obligation 
to provide for PDRs in order to monitor users’ 
compliance with domestic ABS requirements? 49
What are the main implications of establishing 
the patent/IP office as a designated checkpoint 
under the Nagoya Protocol? 49
What is the possible relationship between a 
new PDR and ABS obligations under the FAO 
ITPGRFA? 49
18. Other measures 52
Are there alternative and/or complementary 
measures or mechanisms that can be used to 
promote PDR-related objectives? 52
19. PDRs – a checklist for policymakers 55
Endnotes 57
Annex: Disclosure requirements table 61

4
Foreword
Transparency through the disclosure of patented inven-
tions has been a defining feature of the modern patent 
system since its inception. As modern innovation con-
tinues to build upon and further advances the diversity 
of genetic resources, recent discussions have identified 
questions as to whether existing patent disclosure re -
quirements should be additionally expanded through 
specific disclosure requirements for genetic resources 
and traditional knowledge to further improve the trans-
parency and efficacy of the patent system.
In 2002, the World Intellectual Property Organization 
(WIPO) was requested by the Conference of the Parties 
to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) to pre-
pare a technical study on questions pertaining to patent 
disclosure requirements related to genetic resources and 
traditional knowledge. The resulting WIPO Technical 
Study was made available to the Conference of the Parties 
of the CBD in 2004, and it was widely appreciated.
More recently, and as policy, legal and practical questions 
pertaining to patent disclosure requirements related to 
genetic resources and traditional knowledge are being 
discussed at WIPO in the context, in particular, of the 
WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual 
Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge 
and Folklore (the IGC), many have called for updated and 
improved empirical information on these questions. At 
its Twenty-Ninth Session in 2016, the IGC endorsed the 
updating and improving of the WIPO Technical Study 
from 2004 and requested the WIPO Secretariat to com-
plete the exercise as soon as possible.
The current publication is the second update and im -
provement of the original WIPO Technical Study from 
2004, incorporating the latest practical and empirical 
information provided by Member States and stakehold-
ers. It provides a purely technical account of the legal 
and operational questions that have been identified as 
arising in the context of patent disclosure requirements 
related to genetic resources and traditional knowledge, 
and does not promote or propose any particular position, 
approach or perspective on this matter. The study looks 
at the key questions identified from the point of view of 
the patent system and in relation to other relevant legal 
and policy frameworks.
I am confident that this new publication responds to 
the request for up-to-date empirical information and 
that it will make a valuable contribution to reflections 
by policymakers and others as to whether existing 
patent disclosure requirements should be additionally 
expanded through specific disclosure requirements for 
genetic resources and traditional knowledge.

Francis Gurry
Director General, WIPO

5
Modern scientific research and the exploitation of genetic 
resources and traditional knowledge may offer great 
benefits to humankind. How can the patent system 
help scientists, commercial enterprises, public sector 
research institutions and civil society at large to realize 
those benefits while safeguarding the rights and interests 
of biodiversity-rich countries, innovators, indigenous 
and local communities and the scientific community?
It has been argued that new patent disclosure require -
ments related to genetic resources and traditional knowl-
edge are part of the answer, and several countries have 
already implemented such requirements in various forms. 
But different countries have varying approaches and 
priorities to this question. Policymakers in each country 
need to find the right approach for them. If a country 
decides to introduce new patent disclosure requirements, 
a key challenge is to establish a coherent legal and pol-
icy framework for them, to ensure their balanced and 
synergetic implementation in the context of national 
innovation systems. Asking the right questions at the 
outset should help in this challenging task.
This study from the World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO) is intended to fill a gap in the 
existing literature and so inform policy dialogue, imple-
mentation and training in this area. It:
• reviews, complements and updates existing WIPO 
resources and research from leading scholars;
• identifies the key questions that all policymakers need 
to address in this area;
• discusses approaches in many different developed 
and developing countries; and
• presents policy options in a user-friendly format, with 
helpful graphics, case studies and further reading.
This study is not a substitute for legal advice. It aims to 
contribute to discussion and analysis, and to help clar-
ify some of the legal and policy matters raised. It offers 
a comprehensive but scrupulously neutral treatment 
of the subject. With a focus on practical experiences, 
it does not advocate any particular approach or ex -
pound a definitive interpretation of any treaty. It does 
not express a policy position on the part of WIPO, its 
Secretariat or its Member States, and is not intended 
to preempt or interfere with the deliberations of the 
WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual 
Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge 
and Folklore.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the authors 
to verify the information contained in this publication. 
However, the published material is being distributed 
without warranty of any kind, either expressed or im -
plied. WIPO has taken care to ensure that the links to 
external websites provided in the study are correct as at 
the time of publication, but these external sites are out 
of WIPO’s control and subject to change. WIPO bears 
no responsibility for the accuracy, legality or content of 
any external site or for subsequent links.
The present publication is an updated and streamlined 
version of the 2017 edition of this publication. The 
study was produced by WIPO’s Traditional Knowledge 
Division. The lead authors of the 2017 edition were 
Claudio Chiarolla and Burcu Kılıç. Support and com -
ments were provided on one or both versions by Wend 
Wendland, Shakeel Bhatti, Daphne Zografos Johnsson, 
Olga Begoña Venero Aguirre, Fei Jiao, Alice Manero, 
Rhona Rwangyezi and Carla Bengoa Rojas. Special 
thanks are due to Graham Dutfield, Manuel Ruiz Muller 
and Jayashree Watal for peer-reviewing the first draft of 
the 2017 edition, and Toby Boyd for editing it. Further 
peer-review of the 2017 edition was provided by Marco 
Aleman, Tomoko Miyamoto, Ewald Glantschnig and 
Eun-Joo Min.

Preface

6
List of boxes and figures
Box 1: Spotlight Brazzein berries in Gabon 10
Box 2: Key principles on ABS of the CBD 11
Box 3: The WIPO Budapest Treaty on the International 
Recognition of the Deposit of Microorganisms for the 
Purposes of Patent Procedure 12
Box 4: The Bonn Guidelines on ABS 13
Box 5: The definition of biopiracy in Peru 14
Box 6: Spotlight Fair and equitable benefit-sharing 
concerning Arogyapaacha -based drugs 14
Box 7: Enhancing transparency of the patent system in 
Belgium 15
Box 8: Interaction between GRs, TK and IP 15
Box 9: Policy coherence between the ABS authority 
and the patent office in Panama 16
Box 10: Spotlight Patent term extensions 17
Box 11: Balancing ABS and innovation governance 
in Brazil 18
Box 12: Disclosure requirements in biodiversity laws 24
Box 13: Biodiversity Law of France 24
Box 14: Vanuatu’s framework for PDRs 25
Box 15: Disclosure requirements in the Plant Variety 
Act of Norway 27
Box 16: The subject matter of disclosure 28
Box 17: The Nagoya Protocol on ABS 29
Box 18: Contract law: “derived product” under MTAs 30
Box 19: PDRs based on absolute reciprocity between 
the countries of the Andean Community 33
Box 20: Qualitative methods to identify appropriate 
markers for triggering a new PDR 36
Box 21: Background on definitions in the context 
of the Nagoya Protocol 36
Box 22: Consequences of failure to comply 39
Box 23: African geranium (the pelargonium patent) 45
Box 24: Indian Institutional Framework 46
Box 25: Regional Strategy for Andean Countries 46
Box 26: German Law on new PDRs 47
Box 27: South African depository system 47
Box 28: Information technologies in South Africa 48
Box 29: The Nagoya Protocol, 2010 50
Box 30: Nagoya Protocol Article 17 – Monitoring the 
Utilization of GRs 50
Box 31: The SMTA reporting obligations 51
Box 32: Traditional Knowledge Digital Library 
(TKDL), India 53
Box 33: The WTO TRIPS Agreement 54
Box 34: Indian Patent Act, 1970 54
Figure 1: Examples of GRs and their derivatives 29
Figure 2: The relationship between declaration of 
source under the Swiss Federal Act on Patents for 
Inventions and the due diligence and notification 
requirements of the Swiss Federal Act on the Protection 
of Nature and Cultural Heritage 52
Figure 3: ARIPO TK database 54

7
List of acronyms
ABS Access and benefit-sharing
ARIPO African Regional Intellectual Property Organization
CBD Convention on Biological Diversity
CNA Competent National Authorities
COP Conference of the Parties
EPO European Patent Office
EU European Union
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GH genetic heritage
GRs genetic resources
IGC WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and 
Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore
IP intellectual property
IPR intellectual property rights
IPLCs indigenous peoples and local communities
ITPGRFA International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and 
Agriculture
IUCN The International Union for Conservation of Nature
MAT mutually agreed terms
MTA material transfer agreement
PDRs patent disclosure requirements
PGRFA plant genetic resources for food and agriculture
PIP Pandemic Influenza Preparedness
PIC prior informed consent
PVP plant variety protection
R&D Research and Development
SMTA Standard Material Transfer Agreement
TCEs traditional cultural expressions
TK traditional knowledge
TKDL Traditional Knowledge Digital Library
UPOV Union internationale pour la protection des obtentions végétales 
(International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants)
USPTO United States Patent and Trademark Office
WIPO World Intellectual Property Organization
WTO World Trade Organization

8
There is keen interest in patent disclosure requirements 
(PDRs) related to genetic resources and traditional knowl-
edge. It has been argued that they may have a valuable 
role to play within intellectual property (IP) and innovation 
systems. In order to obtain patent protection for any in -
vention, it is necessary, among other things, to disclose 
detailed technical information about it. By extending that 
disclosure obligation, it is argued that it may be possible 
to simultaneously enhance the transparency of the patent 
system and monitor the contribution of traditional knowl -
edge and genetic resources to new patentable inventions, 
potentially helping to ensure that such knowledge and 
resources are used with the permission of the countries 
and/or communities from which they originated, and that 
some benefits from the resulting inventions are shared with 
those countries and/or communities.
In other words, it is claimed that disclosure requirements may 
help to prevent the misappropriation of genetic resources and 
traditional knowledge by ensuring that they are used with the 
prior informed consent (PIC) of the provider countries and/
or their legitimate holders, on mutually agreed terms (MAT).
Thus, it is argued, new disclosure obligations may promote 
the fair and equitable sharing of benefits between holders 
of genetic resources and traditional knowledge – mostly 
biodiversity-rich countries and indigenous peoples and 
local communities (IPLCs) or persons who have acquired 
such resources and knowledge from them – and those with 
the modern technologies to characterize them1 and exploit 
their scientific and commercial potential. They may also 
increase legal certainty, transparency and efficiency within 
patent systems and/ or IP systems,2 for example by helping 
to identify relevant prior art and so reducing the risk that 
patent protection is wrongly awarded to inventions that do 
not meet the requirements of novelty and inventive step. And 
there may be complementarity and mutual supportiveness 
between such disclosure requirements and international 
agreements relevant to conservation, sustainable use and 
benefit-sharing of genetic resources and associated tradi-
tional knowledge.
However, the creation and implementation of disclosure 
requirements related to genetic resources and traditional 
knowledge are not straightforward. There are many options 
to consider – different ways in which laws might be framed, 
important differences in terms of the possible scope and 
content of obligations, the consequences of breaching those 
obligations, the mechanisms and institutions that might 
enforce them, and so on. Each of these different options 
may entail risks and costs, which will vary depending on 
the national context in which a disclosure requirement is 
implemented.
At the international level, negotiations have been taking 
place since 2010 under the aegis of the World Intellectual 
Property Organization (WIPO) with the objective of reaching 
agreement on the text of an international legal instrument or 
instruments to ensure the balanced and effective protection 
of traditional knowledge, traditional cultural expressions and 
genetic resources. The forum for those text-based negotia-
tions is WIPO’s Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual 
Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge 
and Folklore (IGC), which met for the first time in 2001. As 
part of the negotiations, WIPO’s Member States have been 
debating the possibility of introducing an internationally 
harmonized patent disclosure requirement related to genetic 
resources and traditional knowledge. At the time this study 
was published, more than 30 countries – including both 
developed and developing countries – had implemented 
such requirements through national or regional laws (see 
the Disclosure Requirements Table annexed to this study), 
some others had expressed their interest in doing so, while 
others had expressed their intention not to implement such 
requirements.
The aims of this study
This study analyses the choices available to policymakers 
regarding patent disclosure requirements related to genetic 
resources and traditional knowledge. It is not intended to 
promote patent disclosure requirements related to genetic 
resources and traditional knowledge, and does not advo-
cate any particular approach to implementing them. On 
the contrary, its aim is to emphasize the variety of issues 
at stake and the many options available, exploring and 
illustrating them through examples from different national 
and regional jurisdictions.3 The treatment of these different 
options is neutral. But identifying all the options should en-
able policymakers to reach informed decisions and facilitate 
understanding, implementation and training on these issues 
at the national and regional levels.
The study focuses on the key questions that policymakers 
will need to consider at each stage of the policy develop -
ment process, if they are interested in introducing such 
requirements, from the basic concepts – what are patent 
disclosure requirements related to genetic resources and 
traditional knowledge, how do they differ from conventional 
patent disclosure requirements and why might a government 
wish to introduce them or not – to the different interests 
that may need to be balanced in introducing new patent 
disclosure requirements and the many different ways in 
which they might be designed.
1. Introduction 

9
Introduction
The study also describes how patent disclosure requirements 
have been used by some governments as tools for compli-
ance with national (domestic) legislative, administrative or 
policy measures on access and benefit-sharing (ABS) that 
they have established, including measures under the Nagoya 
Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and 
Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization.4 
According to the accounts of these governments, different 
patent disclosure requirements related to genetic resources 
and traditional knowledge may offer different potential risks 
and opportunities in this regard. A broader aim of the study 
is to further understanding of the interactions between 
patent disclosure requirements and the fair and equitable 
benefit sharing objective of the UN Convention on Biological 
Diversity (CBD) and its complementary instruments, such as 
the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) International 
Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture 
(ITPGRFA) and the Pandemic Influenza Preparedness (PIP) 
Framework of the World Health Organization. 
How to use this study
This study is designed to be as accessible and easy to 
read as possible while providing a full, balanced and ac -
curate treatment of the subject. It simplifies updates, and 
complements existing WIPO resources covering patent 
disclosure requirements related to genetic resources and 
traditional knowledge, and seeks to integrate them into a 
single user-friendly publication.5
As far as possible, the text avoids overly complex scientific, 
legal and technical language. However, the discussion neces-
sarily involves the use of some terms of art. For convenience, 
and to reflect the style normally used in discussions on this 
subject, acronyms are often employed, most notably for 
patent disclosure requirements (PDRs), genetic resources 
(GRs) and traditional knowledge (TK).
The study is split into short sections, so readers can quickly 
zoom in on issues of particular interest. However, the is -
sues are explained in a logical order, and so readers new 
to the subject should start at the beginning. The body text 
presents a succinct discussion of each issue illustrated with 
examples of relevant provisions from national or regional 
laws. There are also optional boxes and figures for readers 
seeking to deepen their understanding – these are color 
coded as follows:
Spotlight: examples or case studies
Suggested “deep-dive” readings from the WIPO 
Technical Study on Disclosure Requirements in Patent 
Systems Related to Genetic Resources and Traditional 
Knowledge (2004)
Legislation (e.g., country laws or relevant 
international instruments, including draft 
instruments and non-legally binding instruments)
Figures
Full references are provided at the end of this study.

10
What are patent disclosure 
requirements related to GRs and TK? 
A patent is a time-limited legal right granted in relation 
to an invention. It confers on the patent holder the right 
to exclude others not having the patent holder’s consent 
from doing or making anything that falls within the subject 
matter of the invention, as defined and bounded by the 
patent claims. Disclosure of the invention sufficient for a 
person with average skill in the relevant field of technology 
to repeat it is part of a quid pro quo: the patentee provides 
this in exchange for the benefits of patent protection. 1 
Hence the theory that patents represent a bargain between 
the inventor and society. Thus, the patent holder can stop 
others not having the patent holder’s consent from using, 
making, selling or importing the invention for a limited period 
of time (generally, the standard patent term is 20 years as 
from the filing of the application). In return, he or she must 
pay patent application and renewal fees and must disclose 
the invention in sufficient detail for a person with average 
skill in the art to repeat it. Through this “bargain” – disclo-
sure of the invention in exchange for protection for a limited 
period – the patent system encourages the disclosure of 
technical information that would otherwise remain secret. 
From society’s point of view, a proper scope of disclosure is 
critical to promote scientific and technological progress and 
spur further innovation, so conventional patent disclosure 
is one of the most important elements of the patent system 
and one of its primary justifications.
Historically, there have been policy tensions between patent 
law and biodiversity-related legislation, which have often 
been the subject of controversies.
Box 1: Spotlight
Brazzein berries in Gabon
The patented product “Brazzein” is derived 
from the Oubli berry, a West African fruit of the 
climbing plant Oubli ( Pentadiplandra brazzeana 
Baillon). The protein derived from the berry is 500 
to 2,000 times sweeter than sugar and is used as 
a substitute or natural, low-calorie sweetener. 2 
Brazzein is recognized as an alternative to 
available low-calorie sweeteners as it is suitable 
for diabetics. 3 It is thermostable, which makes 
it suitable for heat processes utilized in food 
manufacturing. 4 
The West African people of Gabon originally 
discovered and nurtured the plant, which 
was used to help nursing infants “forget” their 
mother’s milk. 5 A researcher from the University 
of Wisconsin (UW) observed people and animals 
eating the berries in West Africa and brought them 
to the attention of the University. UW was granted 
three US patents (5,326,580; 5,346,998; 5,527,555) 
and one European patent (684995) for isolating 
and reproducing the protein in a laboratory. One 
claim for the berry in patent US 5,527,555 is to 
“provide Brazzein in large quantities, at low cost, 
by artificial means”. The researchers have since 
concentrated on the reproduction of the protein 
in a laboratory, obviating the need to collect and 
cultivate the plant in Gabon. 6 UW maintains 
that Brazzein is “an invention of a UW-Madison 
researcher”7 and offers no recognition or benefit-
sharing to the people of Gabon. It is claimed that 
the synthetic substitution has caused a significant 
fall in the price of Brazzein, and many Gabonese 
women who used to harvest the fruit have lost 
their source of income. 8 
The global market for artificial and high-intensity 
sweeteners is estimated to be worth around 
USD 3 billion.9 Natur Research Ingredients, a US 
company, acquired a license to produce Brazzein 
from food-grade bacteria using the UW patented 
process. The company had indicated that it wished 
to commercialize Brazzein under the brand name 
Cweet as a cost-effective alternative to stevia or 
monk fruit. 10 At present, it is not known whether 
this product has been commercialized successfully.
2. Background and concept

11
Background and concept
Where the invention disclosed in a patent application is shown 
to have some degree of dependence on the acquisition, 
analysis and use of GRs or TK, or appears to include one 
or both of them wholly or partially in its scope, some have 
expressed concerns regarding how far such dependence 
or incorporation amounts to the misappropriation or misuse 
of such GRs and TK through the patent system and/or a 
violation of biodiversity-related legislation.
Against this backdrop, growing concerns by some about 
unauthorized access to and use of GRs and TK and their 
subsequent misappropriation have led to the introduction 
of additional measures to strengthen or broaden the con -
ventional disclosure obligations in the patent system. In 
particular, several countries now require patent applicants 
to disclose, among other things: 
• the origin and/or source of GRs and/or TK;
• evidence of PIC for their use connected to research of 
which the claimed invention was an outcome, from the 
provider country and, in some cases, from IPLCs or 
other holders of GRs and/or TK in the provider country 
(e.g., genebanks, botanical gardens, universities, private 
persons, etc), in accordance with domestic law;11
• evidence of having established a contractual arrangement 
(MAT) for the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits 
derived from such use – if so required by the national 
legislation of the provider country.
These additional disclosure obligations are generally referred 
to as patent disclosure requirements related to GRs and 
TK – or, in short, PDRs.
As will be explained in more detail later, these new kinds 
of PDRs may be aimed at, among other things, promoting 
a mutually supportive relationship between the need to 
promote innovation and scientific progress through the 
patent system, on the one hand, and the objectives of the 
CBD on the other.
Box 2: Key principles on ABS of the CBD
The CBD is the first comprehensive international 
agreement dedicated to biological diversity. Its 
objectives are “the conservation of biological 
diversity, the sustainable use of its components 
and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits 
arising out of the utilization of genetic resources, 
including by appropriate access to genetic 
resources and by appropriate transfer of relevant 
technologies, taking into account all rights 
over those resources and to technologies, and 
by appropriate funding” (CBD Article 1). It also 
reaffirms “the sovereign rights of States over their 
natural resources”, including GRs. In particular, 
the CBD provides that “the authority to determine 
access to genetic resources rests with the 
national governments and is subject to national 
legislation” and that “[a]ccess, where granted, 
shall be on mutually agreed terms and […] subject 
to prior informed consent of the Contracting 
Party providing such resources, unless otherwise 
determined by that Party.” (CBD Article 15)
The WIPO Technical Study, p.10.
How do new PDRs related to GRs and 
TK differ from conventional disclosure 
requirements under established patent 
law principles and procedures?
A conventional duty of disclosure exists with respect to 
information that is “material” to the patentability of each 
claim. However, conventional disclosure requirements do 
not normally require disclosure of the origin and/or source 
of GRs and TK, because such information is often not 
strictly relevant to enable the practicing of the invention or 
support the claims.
However, information about the origin and/or source of GRs 
and TK may be voluntarily disclosed in a patent application 
if the applicant believes that it would be needed to meet the 
requirements for patentability such as novelty, 12 inventive 
step13 and industrial applicability. 14 In these cases, such 
information could be considered to be “material” to the 
patentability of the claimed invention.15 For instance, access 
to samples of a GR may be necessary to enable a “person 
skilled in the art” to practice the claimed invention without 
undue experimentation.

12
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Box 3: The WIPO Budapest Treaty on the International 
Recognition of the Deposit of Microorganisms for the 
Purposes of Patent Procedure
Inventions involving the use of new 
microorganisms (that are not yet available to the 
public) could present problems of disclosure in 
that often their repeatability cannot be ensured 
by means of a written description alone – i.e., 
without accessing the microorganism as such. In 
such cases the relevant microbiological material 
can be deposited in an International Depositary 
Authority under the WIPO Budapest Treaty. Thus, 
the physical sample can be made available for the 
purpose of patent procedures and supplement the 
written description. The Budapest Treaty does 
not contain any obligation to precisely disclose 
the sampling site or the collection location of the 
microorganisms for the purpose of assessing the 
conventional patentability requirements. Those 
requirements would have to be incorporated 
into national or regional patent regulations 
governing the patent application requirements. 
If not, the physical deposit of the material 
would obviate any potential need to precisely 
disclose in the patent application the 
sampling site or the collection location of the 
microorganisms for the purpose of assessing 
conventional patentability requirements. 
Given the concerns about illegal access, PDRs related to 
GRs and TK may focus primarily on the legal status of the 
GRs and TK – i.e., whether they have been acquired legally 
subject to PIC and MAT, if that is required by the provider 
country. Documented proof regarding the legal status of such 
materials or knowledge requested from patent applicants, 
for example in the form of a copy of a certificate of compli-
ance issued by a provider country, cannot be considered 
as “material” to the patentability requirements; if it were, 
it would presumably be disclosed under the conventional 
duty of disclosure. Thus, it has no relationship whatever 
with conventional patent disclosure requirements. It is an 
additional and completely separate requirement. 
In this regard, PDRs related to GRs and TK add a new 
“layer” to the conventional disclosure requirement by 
imposing an additional duty to disclose more technical or 
legal information or evidence. They may build on the basic 
obligation to disclose “information material to patentability” 
within the description of the invention and how to work it, 
or they may be added as an entirely separate part of the 
formality requirements.
On the other hand, new PDRs related to GRs and TK may 
enhance compliance with standard requirements for patent 
protection, in particular the requirement of novelty. A proper 
scope of disclosure of information related to GRs and TK 
may help to ensure that relevant prior art is considered in 
the examination of the patent application, so reducing the 
risk that patents are erroneously awarded for inventions 
that lack novelty.
In most legal systems where some form of GRs and/or 
TK-related PDRs have been adopted, the patent applicant 
is expected to exercise due diligence with regard to the ac-
quisition, possession and transfer of information regarding 
the country of origin and/or the legal provenance of GRs 
and TK utilized in the claimed invention (e.g., information 
about the legal status of GRs and TK). According to existing 
examples of PDRs, in the absence of this information, the 
direct source (i.e., the direct provider) of GRs and/or TK may 
be required to be disclosed. For example, universities and 
other ex-situ repositories in public research institutions often 
play a crucial role as intermediaries in the transfer to the 
private sector and other research partners of information, 
knowledge and intermediate research products, including 
biological materials (e.g., advanced breeding lines, isolated 
microorganisms, etc.).16 In some examples of PDRs, if such 
a direct source is unknown then the applicant may be re -
quired merely to make a written declaration to that effect.17
In accordance with the sufficiency of disclosure requirement, 
regardless of PDRs, the disclosure of origin/source of GRs 
and TK is required if the lack thereof would not allow a per-
son skilled in the art to carry out the invention (enablement). 
Conversely, if the lack of the disclosure of origin/source of 
GRs and TK does not affect the enablement, this means that 
a person skilled in the art and a properly trained examiner 
are able to “carry out” the invention without the disclosure 
of GRs and TK.
To sum up, the distinctive feature of additional PDRs relat-
ed to GRs and TK is their primary focus on information or 
documentation that may concern the legal status of GRs 
and TK and the circumstances under which the GRs or TK 
have been acquired by the applicant. Since such information 
is not usually required for the substantive examination of 
patentability, in most cases it is not considered requisite 
to satisfy the sufficiency of disclosure requirement. Finally, 
it is worth stressing that there are also many cases where 
patents are properly granted for inventions relating to GRs 
or TK that have either been legitimately acquired following 
the grant of PIC and the establishment of MAT with the pro-
viding country (and/or the relevant communities) or sourced 
from countries which do not regulate ABS. In these cases, it 
would be a matter of legitimate appropriation of the claimed 
invention as it relates to the GRs or TK.

13
Background and concept
What is the relationship between new 
PDRs and ABS obligations?
A core issue to be considered when introducing PDRs is 
how to frame an appropriate interface, if any, between ABS 
schemes and the patent system. How might disclosure re-
quirements be designed to promote mutual supportiveness, 
synergies and complementarity between the implementation 
of ABS mechanisms and obligations, on the one hand, and 
the innovation incentives of the patent system, on the other?
No single patent disclosure scenario can capture all ex -
isting concerns about GRs and TK relevant to patented 
inventions, nor can any one proposed solution easily fit 
diverse countries. Countries vary in terms of their biodi -
versity endowment, research and biotechnology capacity, 
level of public and private research and development (R&D) 
spending and biocultural sensitivities as well as their na -
tional IP examination capacities.18 While there is clearly no 
one-size-fits-all approach, a number of countries have been 
demanding some degree of harmonization through a new 
legally binding international IP instrument.
In principle, PDRs could be used as a tool to help monitor the 
utilization of GRs and TK and, thereby, also help promote – 
at least in some cases – compliance with ABS obligations.19
Box 4: The Bonn Guidelines on ABS
In 2002, the Contracting Parties to the CBD 
adopted voluntary guidelines, called the Bonn 
Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and 
Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising 
out of their Utilization , in order to support the 
implementation of ABS measures at the legislative, 
administrative and policy levels. The Bonn 
Guidelines are a non-binding instrument that 
provides an illustration of possible approaches 
to national ABS regulatory systems. They also 
provide some guidance on the possible interactions 
between the IP system and the CBD. In particular, 
they suggest measures to support compliance 
with ABS requirements, including “measures to 
encourage disclosure of the country of origin of 
genetic resources and of the origin of traditional 
knowledge, innovations and practices of 
indigenous and local communities in applications 
for intellectual property rights”, measures to 
prevent use of GRs obtained without PIC, and 
measures discouraging unfair trade practices.
The WIPO Technical Study, p.12.
What are the main critiques and 
opposing views?
Opponents of PDRs are concerned that they may add a 
layer of uncertainty to the patent system, and have raised 
additional criticisms as follows:
• The patent system is not suited for, and should not serve 
to implement, exogenous objectives or goals (such as ABS 
objectives) because this would compromise its integrity.
• It would be burdensome, expensive and time-consuming20 
for patent applicants and patent offices to implement 
new PDRs.
• Patent offices would not be equipped to judge whether 
information regarding the disclosure of origin or source 
of a GR or TK was correct and accurate, and whether any 
national ABS requirements had been fulfilled.
• If an examiner had to carry out substantive examination 
of a PDR, patent validity would no longer be an exclusive 
function of novelty, inventive step and industrial application.
• Since a disclosure requirement may involve an external 
entity deciding whether an inventor had the right to conduct 
research (and there have been experiences of significant 
delays in obtaining PIC and MAT), the need for PIC and 
MAT before filing a patent application confronts patent 
applicants with a risk and increased legal uncertainty.
• PDRs would put the general public interest of freedom 
to do research at stake.
• PDRs could reduce innovation incentives generated by 
the patent system, with inventors turning increasingly to 
secrecy to protect their innovation.
Some countries have therefore argued in international fora 
that only national mechanisms independent of patent law 
should be used to promote compliance with ABS obliga -
tions.21 Those who share such a view generally emphasize 
the problem of erroneously granted patents and the role 
of conventional PDRs in addressing this. As an alternative 
solution to new PDRs related to GRs and TK, they high -
light the importance of mechanisms such as searchable 
databases to make relevant information easily accessible 
to patent examiners, guidelines to improve the quality and 
efficiency of patent examination, due diligence measures 
and voluntary codes of conduct.

14
Why have several countries introduced 
new PDRs related to GRs and TK? 
PDRs are implemented in diverse ways, reflecting different 
policy motivations, political trade-offs, local priorities and 
needs, and legal and institutional systems. As a generalization, 
key motivations include but are not limited to the following. 
These motivations are not listed in any order of priority. 
Preventing misappropriation
In some countries, such as India, Norway, Peru and Vanuatu 
among others, new PDRs serve the public policy goal of 
preventing the misappropriation of GRs and TK that have 
been obtained without the authorization (e.g., in the form 
of PIC) of the country providing such resources and/or the 
IPLCs holding such knowledge.
Box 5: The definition of biopiracy in Peru
The Act on the Protection of Access to Peruvian 
Biological Diversity and the Collective Knowledge 
of Indigenous Peoples 2004, Law No. 28216 (third 
supplementary and final provision) states that:
“Biopiracy means unauthorized and non- 
remunerated access to and use of biological 
resources or collective knowledge of indigenous 
peoples by others, without the relevant 
authorization and in contravention of the 
principles established in the Convention on 
Biological Diversity and the rules in force on 
the matter. Such appropriation may occur by 
means of physical control, through ownership 
rights to products which incorporate such 
elements that were illicitly obtained or in some 
cases through invocation of such elements.”
Legal uncertainty may arise from a lack of user-country 
measures, among other things.1 In this regard, new PDRs 
may allow countries to monitor the use of GRs and TK within 
their patent systems, and assist user countries in overcoming 
uncertainties related to the enforcement of ABS contracts 
and obligations. Many megadiverse countries 2 therefore 
regard PDRs as an important measure to encourage patent 
applicants to comply with requirements for PIC and MAT.3 
They believe that such new PDRs – especially when man-
datory – may lead to changes in the attitudes and behaviors 
of inventors. Thus, they may reinforce the effects of an ABS 
system and reduce the free-riding incentives to freely obtain 
a benefit from someone else’s GRs or TK without proper 
compensation or authorization. Ultimately, in their view, this 
should help to prevent misappropriation.
Box 6: Spotlight
Fair and equitable benefit-sharing concerning 
Arogyapaacha -based drugs
In South India, the medicinal knowledge of the 
Kani tribe led to the development of “Jeevani”, 
an anti-stress and anti-fatigue drug based on the 
medicinal plant Arogyapaacha . Indian scientists 
at the Tropical Botanical Garden and Research 
Institute (TBGRI) in Kerala, India, used tribal TK 
and know-how to develop the drug and isolated 
12 active compounds from Arogyapaacha , which 
was used as a GR for R&D. The Institute initially 
applied for a variety of patents for the process of 
making drugs in 1994. 4 In 2008, an updated patent 
application was filed for the product Jeevani. 5
In the meantime, the Indian patent law had been 
amended6 to include provisions on mandatory 
disclosure of source and geographical origin of 
the biological material and associated TK used 
in the invention in patent applications. Thus, 
the later-filed patent application for Jeevani 
refers to traditional use of Arogyapaacha ,7 
stating: “The tribal inhabitants (Kani tribe) of 
this area call this plant Arogyapacha meaning 
‘evergreen health’ and they use the seeds of this 
plant as a rejuvenator and antifatigue agent.”
The technology was licensed to Arya Vaidya 
Pharmacy Ltd., an Indian manufacturer pursuing 
the commercialization of Ayurvedic herbal 
formulations. A trust fund was established to share 
the benefits arising from the commercialization 
of the drug. The benefit-sharing agreement 
between TBGRI and the Kani people has been 
acclaimed as a model for similar agreements 
around the world. It is acknowledged as pioneering 
example of the effective use of IP in concert with 
benefit-sharing agreements with an indigenous 
community that held this knowledge. 8
Enhancing efficiency, legal certainty and 
transparency
The essence of the patent system is transparency and dis-
closure.9 The very operation of the patent system involves 
making publicly available a great deal of legal, administrative 
and technological information in an accessible format. Some 
patent applications do, as a matter of practice, disclose 
information concerning GRs and TK. A new PDR could hold 
promise as a transparency measure. This could improve the 
examination of patent applications and the determinations 
of prior art and inventorship (or co-inventorship), thereby 
3. Objectives

15
Objectives
potentially increasing patent quality and legal certainty about 
the status of granted patents. 10 This could enhance the 
overall efficiency of the patent system. But, if transparency 
is something to be promoted, legislators and policymakers 
need to be clear on what exactly is to be made transparent, 
what the transparency is supposed to achieve, and what 
should be the legal consequences if private actors fail to 
be transparent.
Box 7: Enhancing transparency of the patent system in 
Belgium
Law of April 28, 2005 modifying the Law of 
March 28, 1984 on Patents, in particular the 
Patentability of Biotechnological Inventions
Belgium amended its patent law of March 28, 
1984 (BPL) in order to implement Directive 
98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of July 6, 1998 on the legal protection of 
biotechnological inventions . In particular, Article 
15, § 1, 6 BPL provides “that patent applications 
must contain the geographic source of the plant 
or animal material, if known, that formed the 
basis for the development of the invention.” This 
is a formal requirement that aims to contribute 
to transparency with regard to the geographical 
origin of the GR on which the invention is directly 
based. The standard form for national patent 
applications provides for tick boxes that oblige 
the applicant to declare (Yes or No) whether use 
has been made of GRs in the sense specified in 
Article 15, § 1, 6 BPL. The applicant is thus invited 
to provide information on the geographical source 
of the GR. If this information is not available, he 
or she may declare that the source is not known. 
This measure provides for a mere formality that 
does not put any burden on the patent office, i.e., 
the office does not have to undertake any further 
research regarding the geographical source 
of the material as declared by the applicant. 
Such information is made available to the 
public by means of inclusion of the application 
form in the public part of the patent file.
Source: WIPO/GRTKF/IC/16/INF/15, Annex, p.2.
Furthermore, the transparency and efficiency of the patent 
system can be enhanced by, inter alia, increasing the online 
availability and searchability of patent information on the 
disclosure of GRs and associated TK. As a supporting mea-
sure, the establishment of more comprehensive databases 
of GRs or similar mechanisms to prevent the granting of 
erroneous patents has also been proposed; this is discussed 
further below in section 18, p.54.
Complementarity/mutual supportiveness with 
international agreements
It has been maintained that the implementation of new PDRs 
at the national level could strengthen the mutual support -
iveness and complementarity between IP and ABS regimes 
under the CBD and its Nagoya Protocol.11 Laws on ABS have 
different objectives and scope of application from the laws 
underpinning the patent system, and are administered by 
different institutions. PDRs, if properly implemented, could 
promote coherence between these laws and ultimately 
enhance cooperation between their respective institutions.
Box 8: Interaction between GRs, TK and IP
There has been very extensive discussion 
of the possible linkages between GRs, TK 
and the patent system, both as a means of 
“improving benefit sharing by creating a 
positive link between […] patent legislation 
and […] legislation governing access to genetic 
resources” and as a means of policing restrictions 
on the use of GRs and TK. The objectives for 
clarifying and strengthening these linkages 
have variously been defined as transparency 
and monitoring, and as enforcing compliance 
with legal obligations governing access.
The WIPO Technical Study, pp.30-32
Timely and effective communication about PDRs between 
patent offices and ABS authorities may also generate pos-
itive synergies and foster mutual supportiveness between 
these systems.

16
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Box 9: Policy coherence between the ABS authority and 
the patent office in Panama
Executive Decree No. 25 of April 29, 2009 
regulating Article 71 of the General Law on the 
Environment (Law No. 41 of July 1, 1998).
The General Law on the Environment establishes 
the National Environmental Authority ( Autoridad 
Nacional del Ambiente ) as the competent authority 
that regulates and controls access to and use of 
GRs (with the exception of human GRs), including 
with respect to relevant IP issues. According to 
Article 72 of the Law, the right to use natural 
resources does not grant its users the right also 
to use the GRs contained therein. This Article is 
considered to be the legal basis of ABS regulation.
Executive Decree No. 25 further establishes 
the conditions and procedures for accessing 
GRs and TK from Panama, including PIC 
and MAT requirements that are intended to 
promote benefit-sharing. The Decree requires 
access contracts to include an obligation 
for the applicant to declare the origin and 
provenance of GRs in all the publications 
or summaries that incorporate the genetic 
or biological resources collected (Article 19, 
paragraph e). Likewise, a “certificate of 
origin and provenance for the genetic and/
or biological resource or material that is used 
in the development of the invention should be 
presented in all patent applications that are 
submitted to the General Office of Intellectual 
Property and/or any other patent office of WIPO 
member countries” (Article 19, paragraph g).
Reportedly, the National Environmental 
Authority and the Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry, through the Directorate of Industrial 
Property, are working together in order to 
ensure compliance with ABS regulations 
under the Nagoya Protocol.12 Periodic patent 
searches of databases held by the European 
Patent Office (EPO), the United States Patent 
and Trademark Office (USPTO) and WIPO are 
regularly conducted. While searching these 
databases is a complex exercise, it has been 
suggested that a search strategy could be 
significantly improved based on the information 
included in research reports or publications 
that are submitted to the competent ABS 
authority under Article 19, paragraph (f) 
of the Executive Decree. 13 Moreover, the 
Panamanian patent regulations are under 
review to determine whether to include the 
communication of the source or origin of a 
genetic or biological resource as a requirement 
for patent applications.14 Reportedly there has 
been no case of misappropriation or erroneous 
patent grant detected in Panama since 1998.
Evidence of legal access to and use of a GR/TK may simply 
include information about the circumstances or geographic 
location in which the GR/TK was obtained in the interest 
of transparency. Alternatively, if there is a requirement to 
provide evidence of PIC (e.g., from specific GR/TK holders) – 
then this will need to be obtained and presented before a 
patent application is filed or a patent is validly granted.15
Policies and legislation enacted to fulfil the policy objectives 
described in the above section may result in a regulatory 
system that explicitly chooses to achieve overlapping and 
mutually supportive policy goals. These goals should guide 
the specific design of policy options on new PDRs and their 
implementation at the national level. 

17
What interests and objectives may 
need to be balanced when shaping an 
appropriate disclosure obligation?
While efficient and dynamic interactions between ABS and 
IP systems through a new PDR may help governments serve 
the public interest in the (defensive) protection of GRs and 
TK1 and preventing their misappropriation, governments may 
also need to monitor the effects of new PDRs on innovation.
Preventing the erroneous grant of patents has become a 
vital part of the debate over PDRs. 2 Those not seeking to 
develop new PDRs, and particularly those opposing them, 
including industry stakeholders,3 have expressed concern 
that mandatory new PDRs would reduce the legal certainty 
and predictability of the patent system, cause additional 
delays in the processing of patent applications and impede 
innovation.4 Furthermore, patent term extensions (patent 
term adjustments or patent term restoration) have been 
proposed to compensate patent owners for (unreasonable)5 
delays incurred in the patent prosecution.
Box 10: Spotlight Patent term extensions
Under the World Trade Organization’s Agreement 
on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property 
Rights (TRIPS), patents expire 20 years after the 
initial filing date. Measures related to patent term 
extension go beyond the minimum standards 
which World Trade Organization (WTO) Members 
are obliged to implement under the TRIPS 
Agreement. However, such measures appear in U.S. 
law6 and the laws of some other countries that have 
free trade agreements with the U.S., for example 
Chile,7 Singapore8 and the Republic of Korea. 9
A number of mechanisms already exist or may be consid-
ered in the patent system – and can be further improved – 
to address patent quality and efficiency, and prevent and 
correct undesired effects of erroneously granted patents 
(i.e., patents that do not fulfil the patentability requirements). 
Databases, guidelines and the adjustment of search tools 
and patent classification systems are some of the additional 
measures proposed to help patent examiners find relevant 
prior art, avoid granting erroneous patents and simplify and 
streamline administrative systems for the benefit of all users 
of the system and the public as a whole.
To sum up, there is a risk – particularly at a time of rapid sci-
entific and technological advances and innovation – that new 
PDRs may become an obstacle to achieving the economic 
and social well-being for which they are intended. PDRs may 
potentially slow down innovation and discourage invest -
ment. The interpretation and implementation of ambiguous 
ABS rules and regulations by biodiversity authorities and 
patent offices, and the perverse effects of regulations that 
are outdated or poorly designed to achieve their intended 
policy goals, may present serious challenges, particularly for 
local R&D and innovation. It has been said that overly strict 
ABS regimes could affect scientists in developing countries 
most severely, because they have few or no resources to 
establish adequate due diligence measures and obtain the 
required permits. Consequently, higher transaction costs 
could increase the expense of performing research and 
slow the pace of scientific and technological innovation 
particularly in those countries.10
In light of these policy considerations, a key challenge is 
to establish a coherent legal and policy framework for any 
new PDRs to ensure their balanced and synergetic imple-
mentation in the context of national innovation systems. The 
potential of new PDRs for local innovation in general and 
ABS in particular can only be realized if countries succeed 
in providing an innovation governance structure that is bal-
anced, flexible and takes into account differences between 
access to GRs for pure or upstream research and for the 
development of commercial products.11
4. Complementary and competing 
interests and objectives

18
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Box 11: Balancing ABS and innovation governance in 
Brazil
Brazil is widely acknowledged as one of the 
richest countries in the world in terms of its 
biodiversity and associated TK. 12 Biotechnology 
is one of the new generic technologies related to 
GRs underlying industrial growth in Brazil. 13

Until very recently, granting IP rights for a 
process or product obtained from samples of 
“genetic heritage [GH] components” was linked to 
compliance with Provisional Act 2.186-16/2001. 14 
The Brazilian disclosure system was fiercely 
criticized by stakeholders (industry, the scientific 
community and indigenous people) for being too 
complex, hard to navigate and burdensome. 15
The Act created barriers to R&D on GRs and 
TK, and posed additional challenges to the 
country’s still-immature innovation system by 
creating excessive control over non-commercial 
research and increasing transaction costs. 16 As 
Pinto (2016) explains, the application of a PDR 
under Provisional Act 2.186-16/2001 had several 
unintended consequences, rendering benefit-
sharing measures ineffective and suppressing 
R&D and patent-filing activity. In 14 years, 
only 136 ABS contracts were approved, with no 
synergy with the Brazilian innovation system.
The Provisional Act has now been repealed by Law 
Nº 13.123 of May 20, 2015, which provides a new 
framework for access to GRs and TK and the fair 
and equitable sharing of benefits for preserving 
and sustaining Brazilian biodiversity. 17 Decree 
Nº 8.772 of May 11, 2016 further implements 
specific aspects that concern, inter alia , a 
requirement to provide information on relevant 
research activities that involve GH components 
or associated TK through an electronic registry.
Pinto (2016) notes that the new Biodiversity Law 
(Nº 13.123 of May 20, 2015) emphasizes incentives 
rather than penalties. It requires only that “the 
granting of intellectual property rights… on the 
finished product or on reproductive material 
obtained from access to GRs or associated TK, 
is conditioned to registration or authorization 
under the terms of the Law.” While authorization 
is required only in cases of national security, 
fines may apply for failure to register the use of 
domestic GRs. ABS requirements apply only to the 
sale of a final product, and PIC is mandatory in 
case of an identified TK holder. Part of the benefits 
will fund a National Benefit-Sharing Program.
Under the old Provisional Act 2.816-16/2001, the 
mere application procedure for an ABS contract 
could take two years or more. Now, under the 
new law, scientific R&D merely requires an 
online registration which can be completed in 
a few minutes. Aside from the time necessary 
to undertake research, the estimated time 
from online registration to the request for a 
patent is approximately three months. 18
It is therefore suggested that the combination of 
biological and cultural diversity in Brazil could 
lead to a competitive advantage for domestic 
R&D, if appropriate innovation policies are 
put in place to promote ethno-pharmacology 
and foster biological and cultural diversity via 
the flow of benefits back to TK holders. 19

19
Complementary and competing interests and objectives
Source: Daniel R. Pinto, “Disclosure requirements and access and benefit sharing – an overview of recent developments in Brazilian biodiversity 
legislation”, presentation delivered at the WIPO Seminar on IP and Genetic Resources (May 26-27, 2016), based on research by Manuela da Silva 
(FIOCRUZ, 2016), adapted from Nascimento e Mourão Advogados.
Select species of Brazilian 
biodiversity to access
Online registration Access to Brazilian 
biodiversity – R&D
Final product resulting 
from access to 
genetic heritage
Negotiate ABS terms with 
government/community
Commercialization of 
/f_inal product derived from 
Brazilian genetic heritage
Bene/f_it sharing (monetary or not) with government or community
Steps for the ful/f_illment of the law
The whole process can take approximately three months (not counting research time)
Electronic noti/f_ication 
of /f_inal product
ABS agreement 
implemented

20
What is the difference between 
voluntary and compulsory PDRs?
Many countries, including both developed and developing 
countries, have adopted some form of PDRs relating to GRs 
and TK in their national laws. 1 They may impose various 
levels of obligations for the patent applicants. When con -
sidering the nature of the obligation to disclose, countries 
should decide whether a new PDR should be voluntary or 
mandatory for the patent applicant. In doing so, they may 
consider what the respective advantages and disadvan -
tages of these options would be. For example, a voluntary 
PDR can be introduced as part of the patent procedure 
without any consequences for patent prosecution or patent 
validity. A compulsory PDR may take the form of a mere 
formality in the patent procedure – generally, with potential 
consequences for the pre-grant phase only – or it can be 
considered as a patentability criterion with potential impli-
cations for patent validity.
When made compulsory, these requirements may also 
be either substantive or formal in nature. The difference 
between formal and substantive PDRs hinges on whether 
their fulfilment is provided for as part of the procedure, the 
content or the form of an application, rather than during 
the substantive examination of the claimed invention. For 
example, a formality requirement may refer to the need to 
submit certain types of documents or a required physical 
format, whereas a substantive requirement may refer to 
the nature of the invention or to the underlying standards 
of patentability (e.g., novelty, inventive step, industrial appli-
cation and sufficiency of disclosure). Drawing the dividing 
line between formal and substantive requirements is not 
always an easy task, since this difference can be nuanced 
in practice.2
A standalone PDR related to GRs and TK (i.e., separate from 
general requirements related to sufficiency of disclosure or 
enablement) may take several different forms, as follows.
A voluntary PDR. If an encouragement is included in 
the preamble of patent legislation, it may constitute an 
exhortation to disclose details of GRs or TK in patent 
specifications when relevant to the claimed invention and/
or ABS compliance. For example:
European Union (EU): Directive 98/44/EC on the 
Legal Protection of Biotechnological Inventions of 
July 6, 1998. In its Preamble, the Directive encour-
ages applicants to mention the geographical origin 
of biological material in the patent application:
“(26) Whereas if an invention is based on biological 
material of human origin or if it uses such material, 
where a patent application is filed, the person from 
whose body the material is taken must have had an 
opportunity of expressing free and informed consent 
thereto, in accordance with national law. 
“(27) Whereas if an invention is based on biological 
material of plant or animal origin or if it uses such 
material, the patent application should, where appro-
priate, include information on the geographical origin 
of such material, if known; whereas this is without 
prejudice to the processing of patent applications or 
the validity of rights arising from granted patents.”
A voluntary PDR may also be introduced as a formal part of 
the patent application process, i.e., in the operative provi-
sions. In this case too, non-fulfilment – namely, the absence 
of information on the origin or source of the material – will 
have no bearing on the further processing of the patent 
application or the validity of granted rights. Thus, a voluntary 
PDR does not constitute a de facto or de jure patentability 
criterion.3 For example:
Germany: Section 34(a) of the Patent Act as pub-
lished on December 16, 19804 (as last amended by 
Article 1 of the Act of October 19, 2013)5 provides:
“Where an invention is based on biological material 
of plant or animal origin or if it uses such material, 
the application should include information on the 
geographical origin of such material, if known. This 
shall be without prejudice to the examination of 
applications or the validity of rights arising from 
granted patents.”
A mandatory requirement in relation to formalities. In 
some jurisdictions, a PDR must be complied with in order 
to obtain or preserve entitlement to a patent, akin to the 
obligation to provide details of priority documents (or copies 
and translations of priority documents) in order to sustain 
a priority date. In others, failure to comply with procedural 
requirements may, in some cases, have consequences 
including fines and other sanctions. A demonstrated bad-
faith intention to provide a willingly false or deceptive 
disclosure may be subject to administrative or criminal 
sanctions. For example:
Viet Nam: Circular No. 01/2007/TT-BKHCN of 
February 14, 2007, guiding the Implementation of 
the Government’s Decree No. 103/2006/ND-CP 
of September 22, 2006, Detailing and Guiding the 
Implementation of a Number of Articles of the Law on 
Intellectual Property Regarding Industrial Property. 
Under “additional provisions applicable to applications 
for registration of inventions concerning gene source 
or traditional knowledge”, Article 23.11 provides: 
5. Legal nature

21
Legal nature
“[A]n application for registration of an invention 
concerning gene source or traditional knowledge 
must also contain documents explaining the origin 
of the gene source and/or traditional knowledge 
accessed by the inventor or the applicant, if the in-
vention is directly based on that gene source and/or 
traditional knowledge. If the inventor or the applicant 
cannot identify the origin of the gene source and/
or traditional knowledge, he/she shall so declare 
and bear responsibility for the truthfulness of his/
her declaration.”
Switzerland: Article 49(a) of the Federal Act of 
June 25, 1954 on Patents for Inventions (status as 
of January 1, 2017) states:
“The patent application must contain information on 
the source: a) of the genetic resource to which the 
inventor or the patent applicant had access, provided 
the invention is directly based on this resource; b) of 
traditional knowledge of indigenous or local commu-
nities to which the inventor or the patent applicant 
had access, provided the invention is directly based 
on this resource.”
Article 81(a) of the Federal Act further states:
“Any person who willfully provides false information 
under Article 49(a) is liable to a fine of up to 100,000 
francs. The court may order the publication of the 
judgment.”
Norway: Section 8(b) of the Patents Act No. 9 of 
December 15, 1967 (consolidated version of 2016) 
provides: 
“If an invention concerns or uses biological material 
or traditional knowledge, the patent application shall 
include information on the country from which the 
inventor collected or received the material or the 
knowledge (the providing country). If it follows from 
the national law in the providing country that access 
to biological material or use of traditional knowledge 
shall be subject to prior consent, the application shall 
state whether such consent has been obtained. […] 
Breach of the duty to disclose information is subject 
to penalty in accordance with the General Civil Penal 
Code § 221. The duty to disclose information is without 
prejudice to the processing of patent applications or 
the validity of rights arising from granted patents.”
A mandatory requirement of substantive nature, in the 
sense that the assessment of a patent (by an examiner 
or by a court) requires a determination as to whether the 
requirement has been met before deciding whether a patent 
should be granted (or an existing patent should be upheld). 
In some megadiverse countries such as South Africa, India 
and in the Andean Community, PDRs related to GRs and TK 
are considered as having consequences for patentability. 
They aim to promote compliance with the access and 
benefit-sharing requirements of the CBD, and assist in 
tracking the commercial use of GRs and associated TK 
in order to promote fair and equitable benefit-sharing. For 
example:
Andean Community: Article 26 of Decision No. 
486 Establishing the Common Industrial Property 
Regime (2000) states:
“The application for a patent shall be filed with the 
competent national office and shall contain the 
following: […] (h) where applicable, a copy of the 
access contract where the products or processes 
for which a patent is sought have been obtained or 
developed from genetic resources or products derived 
therefrom of which any of the member countries is 
the country of origin; (i) where applicable, a copy of 
the document accrediting the licensing or the autho-
rization of the use of the traditional knowledge of the 
indigenous Afro-American or local communities of 
member countries where the products or processes 
for which protection is sought have been obtained 
or developed from such knowledge of which any 
of the member countries is the country of origin, in 
accordance with the provisions of Decision 391 and 
such of its amendments and implementing regulations 
as are in force.”6
South Africa: Section 30 of the Patents Amendment 
Act (Act No. 20 of 2005) provides:
“(3A) Every applicant who lodges an application for a 
patent accompanied by a complete specification shall, 
before acceptance of the application, lodge with the 
registrar a statement in the prescribed manner stating 
whether or not the invention for which protection is 
claimed is based on or derived from an indigenous 
biological resource, genetic resource, or traditional 
knowledge or use.
“(3B) The registrar shall call upon the applicant to 
furnish proof in the prescribed manner as to his or 
her title or authority to make use of the indigenous 
biological resource, genetic resource, or of the tra-
ditional knowledge or use if an applicant lodges a 
statement that acknowledges that the invention for 

22
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
which protection is claimed is based on or derived 
from an indigenous biological resource, genetic 
resource, or traditional knowledge or use.”
India: Article 10(4)(d)(ii) of the Patents Act, 1970, as 
amended by the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2005, 
provides:
“If the applicant mentions a biological material in the 
specification which may not be described in such 
a way as to satisfy clauses (a) and (b),7 and if such 
material is not available to the public, the application 
shall be completed by depositing the material to an 
international depository authority under the Budapest 
Treaty and by fulfilling the following conditions, namely: 
[…] (d) disclose the source and geographical origin 
of the biological material in the specification, when 
used in an invention.”
The Nagoya Protocol and its Internationally Recognized 
Certificate of Compliance may also be relevant in this 
 context. For further details, see section 17.8

23
What role might the patent office play in 
checking the fulfillment of new formal or 
substantive PDRs?
Patent applications contain a combination of technical, legal 
and administrative information. Typically, patent applicants 
are required to provide information relating to subject matter, 
patentability and prior art, plus administrative or bibliographic 
information relevant to their application.
Typical formality requirements include the need to dis -
close information such as the names of inventor(s) and their 
addresses, to submit certain documents such as priority 
documents (i.e., copies and translations of foreign patent 
applications that form the basis of a claim to priority), and 
to submit the application in a prescribed physical format. 
In some jurisdictions, failure to satisfy certain formality re-
quirements, for example, failure to declare the true inventor 
or to include a co-inventor, failure to disclose known prior 
art, or failure to establish an entitlement derived from the 
inventor, may have severe consequences for the patent 
application.1 Failure to comply with other formality require-
ments, such as payment of maintenance fees or good-faith 
errors in naming inventors, can normally be remedied once 
the failure is identified.2
Substantive requirements generally relate to the actual 
nature of the invention, including considerations for assessing 
compliance with the standards set for patentability. Not all 
“substantive” requirements have to do with the qualities of 
the invention as such; some deal with such issues as in -
ventorship, entitlement to apply for or be granted a patent, 
and other interests in a patent right.
The distinction between substantive and formal require -
ments is often considered in terms of the consequences 
of non-compliance. Failure to comply with substantive 
requirements such as novelty is a ground for the dismissal 
of a patent application or invalidation of a granted patent 
(e.g., during litigation), whereas failure to comply in formal 
terms may not necessarily have irreparable consequences. 
Post-grant challenge to a patent is generally not possible for 
non-compliance with formalities unless the failure to comply 
was fraudulent, and non-fraudulent non-compliance with 
formalities does not normally constitute a ground for over-
turning a granted patent. However, failure to meet certain 
formal requirements may nonetheless lead to the refusal of 
a patent application if it is not rectified in time.3 In regard to 
the patent office’s role, if a PDR related to GRs and TK is 
considered as a mere formality or procedural requirement, 
then it will be subject only to a formality check – i.e., whether 
a disclosure (or a substitute declaration) has been made 
by the applicant in the required form – regardless of any 
examination of its substantive content. The burden on the 
patent office in such a case may well be minimal. It may 
include a duty to collect or receive relevant information or 
declarations and to transmit them to the appropriate com-
petent authorities for the substantive checks, if any (e.g., 
national ABS focal points).
6. Formal and substantive requirements

24
Where should new disclosure 
requirements be introduced?
The vast majority of countries that have introduced some 
sort of disclosure requirements related to GRs and/or TK 
have done so in their patent law or through other measures 
within their IP system.1 However, some countries have opted 
to provide for disclosure-like requirements – either in general 
or more specific terms – in their biodiversity/ABS legislation.
Is it possible to introduce new 
disclosure requirements in legislation 
other than patent and/or IP law?
New disclosure-like requirements can be introduced in leg-
islation other than patent and/or IP law. A review of national 
legislation reveals important variation and flexibilities as 
to which legislation may be used to implement them. In a 
growing number of cases, such disclosure-like requirements 
are provided for in biodiversity and/or ABS laws.
Box 12: Disclosure requirements in biodiversity laws
Brazilian ABS Law
Law No. 13.123 of May 20, 2015 on Access and 
Benefits Sharing of Genetic Resources and 
associated Traditional Knowledge has created 
an electronic registration system for companies 
interested in exploiting GH or associated TK. 2 
In particular, Article 12 states that “the access 
registration must be performed prior to the 
request of any intellectual property rights” (e.g., 
a patent filing). Article 47 further provides that 
“the granting of intellectual property rights by 
the competent body, regarding a final product 
or reproductive material obtained as a result 
of the access to genetic resources or associated 
traditional knowledge is subject to registration 
or authorization in accordance with this Law.”
Costa Rican Law on Biodiversity
Article 80 of the Biodiversity Law of 1998 provides 
that the Technical Office of the National 
Biodiversity Commission within the Ministry of 
Environment, Energy and Telecommunications 
will act as a mandatory consultative body for all 
application procedures involving the protection 
of IP rights related to biodiversity. Its decisions 
are binding on the IP office. In particular, 
Article 80 states that “justified opposition from 
the Technical Office will prohibit registration 
of a patent or protection of the innovation”.
In some of these cases, the IP/patent office contributes to 
collecting or receiving information regarding the utilization 
of GRs and/or associated TK, which is then used by national 
ABS focal points and competent authorities to monitor and 
support compliance with any PIC and MAT requirements. 
Some countries have already implemented such measures 
in their biodiversity/ABS laws.
Box 13: Biodiversity Law of France 3 
Art. L. 412-18. II 2° provides that when a patent 
application arises from the utilization of GRs 
and associated TK, the applicant shall, on 
his or her own initiative, transmit relevant 
information to the National Industrial Property 
Institute. The National Industrial Property 
Institute then makes the information available 
to the competent administrative authorities 
(i.e., those responsible for the application of the 
Regulation of the European Parliament and of 
the Council on compliance measures for users 
from the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic 
Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing 
of Benefits Arising from their Utilization in the 
Union of April 14, 2014) without examining it.
As shown in the above examples, it may be particularly 
important to:
• provide for a transparent interface between IP and ABS 
systems;
• clearly define the respective implementing functions of 
patent/IP offices and national ABS competent authorities 
with regard to an applicable disclosure requirement; and
• establish effective communication between them, while 
respecting their distinct instructional mandates and 
competences.
The provision of disclosure requirements in ABS legislation 
instead of patent legislation may reflect different motivations 
regarding their objectives as well as different implications 
regarding key operational features (e.g., triggers) and ap -
plicable compliance measures.4
PDRs that are formally embedded in national ABS legislation 
generally build on the national biodiversity framework with 
the goal of fostering mutual supportiveness. They may help 
to build solid bridges between ABS and patent regimes. 
They usually include measures directly related to monitoring 
and enforcing compliance with ABS requirements, such as 
the submission of evidence concerning PIC and the estab-
lishment of MAT. However, the implementation of this kind 
of disclosure requirement is not placed exclusively in the 
hands of biodiversity authorities. The patent/IP office may 
7. Placement

25
Placement
support the identification of potential cases of non-compli-
ance by transmitting relevant information to ABS competent 
authorities, to the country providing PIC and/or to the ABS 
Clearing House of the Nagoya Protocol, as appropriate.
On the other hand, PDRs that are incorporated directly 
into patent law have the potential to generate information 
that may enable patent examiners to reach a more accu -
rate, informed and fair decision about patent applications. 
Hence, the frequent use of specific “triggers” that refer to 
the invention being “ based on ” or “ directly based on ” a 
particular GR or associated TK.
Box 14: Vanuatu’s framework for PDRs
Article 47 of the Patents Act No.2 of 2003 provides: 
“If it appears to the [patent] Registrar that 
an application is for the grant of a patent for 
an invention that is based on, arose out of, or 
incorporates elements of, indigenous knowledge, 
the Registrar must refer the application to the 
National Council of Chiefs.” The Registrar must not 
grant patents for such inventions unless: “(a) the 
custom owners of the indigenous knowledge have 
given their [prior informed consent] to the grant; 
and (b) the applicant and the custom owners have 
entered into an agreement on the payment by the 
applicant to the custom owners of an equitable 
share of the benefits from exploiting the patent.” 
If an agreement on PIC and MAT “has not been 
entered into within 12 months after the patent 
application has been lodged: (a) the Registrar 
may grant the patent; (b) the owner may exploit 
the patent; and (c) the Registrar is to determine 
the amount payable to the custom owners or 
the National Council of Chiefs by the owner of 
the patent, being payment of an equitable share 
of the benefits from exploiting the patent.”
In ABS legislation, the “trigger” for a disclosure obligation is 
frequently connected to the “utilization of” GRs and asso-
ciated TK (in line with the terminology used in the Nagoya 
Protocol). Accordingly, activities that trigger benefit-sharing 
and/or ABS compliance-related monitoring obligations will 
also trigger a patent/IP-related disclosure obligation.5
Another important difference between PDRs in ABS leg -
islation and in patent law rests on the consequences of 
non-compliance and the remedies available to address it. 
ABS legislation may provide for various penalties, sanctions 
and fines, including the seizure of GR samples, revocation or 
cancellation of the permission to access a GR, revocation of 
a bioprospecting agreement, a ban on future bioprospecting 
and even imprisonment. These remedies and sanctions 
normally operate outside the remit of the patent system. In 
some instances, non-compliance with a disclosure require-
ment in ABS legislation may have consequences not only 
for patent examination but also for patent granting (see the 
Costa Rican example in Box 12). However, post-grant rem-
edies for non-disclosure such as the revocation of granted 
patents, should that be decided upon as a matter of policy, 
are normally excluded if the disclosure requirement is only 
provided as part of ABS legislation.

26
8. Subject matter
What is the subject matter covered by 
these new PDRs?
The subject matter of a new disclosure obligation raises 
three key policy issues:
i. whether disclosure obligations should apply only to patent 
rights (and patent applications) or also to other IP rights;
ii. whether the subject matter of disclosure should 
encompass only GRs and biological resources or also 
include TK; and
iii. whether the subject matter should encompass 
“derivatives”, raising the issue of the definition of this term.
Patent rights versus other IP rights
Disclosure requirements have been incorporated into IP 
legislation in many countries. In several of them, these 
requirements apply specifically to patent law. For example:
Sweden: Article 5a of Regulation (2004:162) Amending 
the Patents Decree states: 
“If an invention concerns biological material of plant 
or animal origin or if it uses such material, the patent 
application shall include information on the geo -
graphical origin of such material, if this is known. 
If the origin is not known, this shall be indicated.”
In some countries, the scope of the requirements is not 
limited to patent law and applies to other IP rights, including 
plant variety protection and utility models. For example:
Costa Rica: Article 80 of Biodiversity Law No. 7788, 
1998 establishes that: 
“Both the National Seed Office and the Registers 
of Intellectual and Industrial Property are obliged to 
consult with the Technical Office of the Commission 
before granting protection of intellectual or industrial 
property to innovations involving components of 
biodiversity. They must always provide the certifi -
cate of origin issued by the Technical Office of the 
Commission and the prior informed consent.”
Disclosure requirements introduced in biodiversity/ABS 
legislation often apply to all relevant IP rights. For example:
Ethiopia: Article 17 of the Access to Genetic Resources 
and Community Knowledge, and Community Rights 
Proclamation No. 482/2006 states: 
“A person who shall be given an access permit shall 
have the following obligations: […] (12) where he seeks 
to acquire intellectual property right over the genetic 
resources accessed or parts thereof, negotiate new 
agreement with the Institute based on the relevant 
laws of Ethiopia; (13) not apply for a patent or any other 
intellectual property protection over the community 
knowledge accessed without first obtaining explicit 
written consent from the Institute […].”
Brazil: Article 47 of Law No. 13.123 of May 20, 2015 
(Access and Benefits Sharing of Genetic Resources 
and Associated Traditional Knowledge) provides: 
“The grant of intellectual property rights by the 
competent body for the final product or for the 
reproductive material obtained through access to 
genetic resources or associated traditional knowledge 
shall be subject to the registration or authorization 
provided for in this Law.”
Some countries also provide for some sort of disclosure 
requirements specifically in their plant variety protection 
(PVP) legislation. For example:
Malaysia: Section 12 of the Protection of New Plant 
Varieties Act 2004 provides:
“An application for the registration of a new plant 
variety and a grant of a breeder’s right shall be made 
to the Board in the prescribed manner and shall: 
“e) contain information relating to the source of the 
genetic material or the immediate parental lines 
of the plant variety;
“f) be accompanied with the prior written consent of 
the authority representing the local community or 
the indigenous people in cases where the plant 
variety is developed from traditional varieties;
“g) be supported by documents relating to the com-
pliance of any law regulating access to genetic 
or biological resources; and
“h) be supported by documents relating to the com-
pliance of any law regulating activities involving 
genetically modified organisms in cases where 
the development of the plant variety involves 
genetic modification.”

27
Subject matter
Box 15: Disclosure requirements in the Plant Variety 
Act of Norway
Section 4 of Act No. 32 of March 12, 1993, relating to 
Plant Breeder’s Rights (consolidated version of 2015)
The Plant Breeder’s Act Section 4 [includes] an 
obligation […] to disclose the origin of biological 
material and traditional knowledge used in the 
breeding of the new variety. This means that 
information about [the] country of origin etc. 
shall be given for the plant material and possible 
traditional knowledge. The penal provisions 
are the same as in the Patents Act Section 8 b, 
namely the General Civil Penal Code Section 
166. A violation of the obligation to disclose does 
not influence the processing of the application 
or the validity of a protected plant variety.
Source: WIPO/GRTKF/IC/23/INF/10.
However, a requirement to disclose the geographical origin 
of a new plant variety under International Union for the 
Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV)-type legislation 
can also be interpreted in a completely different manner 
(that is, unrelated to the origin of the background GRs/
TK). For example, in the EU and its Member States, this 
requirement is interpreted as the place where the variety 
has been developed by the breeder rather than the country 
of origin of the initial breeding materials used during the 
breeding process.
EU and its Member States: Article 50.1 of the 
Council Regulation (EC) No. 2100/94 of 27 July 1994 
on Community plant variety rights states: 
“The application for a Community plant variety right 
must contain at least the following: […] (g) the geo-
graphic origin of the variety […]”
GRs, biological resources and/or TK
The review of national legislation on PDRs shows that 
various concepts are used to define the subject matter of 
disclosure. Diverse terms could be used, for instance GRs, 
TK, associated TK, TK associated with GRs, indigenous 
knowledge and processes or products derived from, or 
developed with, biological resources and/or TK.
GRs are defined in the CBD as “genetic material of actual or 
potential value”, and “genetic material” as “any material of 
plant, animal, microbial or other origin containing functional 
units of heredity”.1 The latter expression is commonly under-
stood to require the presence of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) 
or RNA (ribonucleic acid) in the material, 2 so may exclude 
many gene products at the sub-organism level, non-DNA 
molecules as well as proteins, which do not contain “func-
tional units of heredity”. 3 On the other hand, the term TK 
may refer to knowledge resulting from intellectual activity in 
a traditional context and include know-how, practices, skills 
and innovations. It is not limited to any specific technical 
field, and may include agricultural, environmental and me-
dicinal knowledge, and knowledge associated with GRs.4
African Regional Intellectual Property Organization 
(ARIPO): Section 2.1 of the Swakopmund Protocol 
on the Protection of Traditional Knowledge and 
Expressions of Folklore within the Framework of the 
ARIPO provides: 
“‘Traditional knowledge’ shall refer to any knowledge 
originating from a local or traditional community 
that is the result of intellectual activity and insight 
in a traditional context, including know-how, skills, 
innovations, practices and learning, where the knowl-
edge is embodied in the traditional lifestyle of a 
community, or contained in the codified knowledge 
systems passed on from one generation to another. 
The term shall not be limited to a specific technical 
field, and may include agricultural, environmental or 
medical knowledge, and knowledge associated with 
genetic resources.”

28
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
The CBD Bonn Guidelines envisage that countries could 
consider, among others, the adoption of “measures to 
encourage the disclosure of the country of origin of the 
genetic resources and of the origin of traditional knowledge, 
innovations and practices of indigenous and local commu-
nities in applications for intellectual property rights.”5 In this 
context, countries have adopted different approaches to the 
definition of the subject matter of new PDRs.
Box 16: The subject matter of disclosure
Reported or published national or regional 
measures apply several related concepts such as:
• “an invention is based on biological material of 
plant or animal origin or if it uses such material 
obtained or developed through an access 
activity” ( EU Biotechnology Directive, 1998 )
• “products or processes whose protection is 
being requested [were] obtained or developed 
on the basis of the knowledge originating in 
any one of the Member Countries” ( Andean 
Community Decision No.391, 2002 )
• “innovations involving elements 
of biodiversity”(Biodiversity Law 
No. 7788, Costa Rica, 2008 )
• “biological material […] when used in 
an invention” and “biological material 
used for the invention” (Patents 
(Amendment) Act, India, 2005, India ).
The WIPO Technical Study, p.35.
For the disclosure of GRs and TK, some countries have 
chosen to elaborate the wording that describes the subject 
matter by drawing on CBD Articles 8(j) and 15.
Andean Community: Article 26 of Decision No. 486 
(2000) Establishing the Common Industrial Property 
Regime states: 
“[W]here applicable, a copy of the access contract 
where the products or processes for which a patent is 
sought have been obtained or developed from genetic 
resources or products derived therefrom of which 
any of the member countries is the country of origin;
“[W]here applicable, a copy of the document accred-
iting the licensing or the authorization of the use of the 
traditional knowledge of the indigenous Afro-American 
or local communities of member countries where the 
products or processes for which protection is sought 
have been obtained or developed from such knowl-
edge of which any of the member countries is the 
country of origin, in accordance with the provisions 
of Decision 391 and such of its amendments and 
implementing regulations as are in force.” 
Philippines: Rule 12 Section 3(c) of the Implementing 
Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 10055 
(Joint Administrative Order No. 02-2010) provides: 
“The disclosure requirement under this section shall 
apply when the subject matter contained in a national 
or international IPR [intellectual property rights] appli-
cation is directly based on any biodiversity, genetic 
resources or materials, traditional knowledge, and 
indigenous knowledge, systems and practices to 
which the research and development institutes and/
or institutions have had access prior to the filing of 
the IPR application. The subject matter contained 
in the IPR application must depend on the specific 
properties of, or must be consciously derived from, 
such biodiversity and genetic resources or materials, 
traditional knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, 
systems and practice.”
Accordingly, some legal systems further extend the scope 
of disclosure to “biodiversity” (in general terms) and to 
“biological resources”, which is a broader concept than 
the narrow definition of GRs. Under the CBD, biological 
resources “include genetic resources, organisms or parts 
thereof, populations, or any other biotic component of eco-
systems with actual or potential use or value for humanity”.6
Denmark: Part I, Chapter 2 (5) of Act 41 (31/5/2000) 
amending the Patent Act (consolidated Patent Act 
926, September 2, 2000) states: 
“If an invention concerns or makes use of biological 
material of vegetable or animal origin, the patent ap-
plication shall include information on the geographical 
origin of the material, if known.”
Egypt: Article 13 of Law No. 82 of 2002 on the 
Protection of Intellectual Property Rights provides: 
“Where the invention involves biological, plant or 
animal product, or traditional medicinal, agricultural, 
industrial or handicraft knowledge, cultural or envi-
ronmental heritage, the inventor should have acquired 
the sources in a legitimate manner.”

29
Subject matter
Derivatives
The Nagoya Protocol defines the term “derivative” as “a 
naturally occurring biochemical compound resulting from 
the genetic expression or metabolism of biological or genetic 
resources, even if it does not contain functional units of he-
redity”. The definition comprises three key elements, namely:
• a naturally occurring biochemical compound
• which results from the genetic expression or metabolism 
of biological or genetic resources
• whether or not it contains functional units of heredity.7
Figure 1: Examples of GRs and their derivatives
CH3
COOH
N
H H
SR
O
CH3
CH3H3C
O
OHNNN
HO
OHO
O
OO
H
HN
H
Genetic resource (contained in) Derivative
Snake (Active ingredient of) Venom
Rose (Chemical responsible for the) Scent 
Fungus (Antibiotic compound) Penicillin 
Other relevant definitions in the Nagoya Protocol include the 
definitions of “utilization of genetic resources” and “biotech-
nology”. The Explanatory Guide of the International Union 
for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) highlights that “the term 
derivative is not used […] in the operative text of the Protocol. 
However, it is linked to the term utilization, which is used direct-
ly (verbatim) or indirectly (adjusted depending on the context 
in which it appears) in many provisions of the Protocol.” 8 
Box 17: The Nagoya Protocol on ABS
As defined in Article 2(c) of the Nagoya 
Protocol, “‘ Utilization of genetic resources ’ 
means to conduct research and development 
on the genetic and/or biochemical 
composition of genetic resources, including 
through the application of biotechnology as 
defined in Article 2 of the Convention”.
Article 2(d) then states: “‘ Biotechnology ’ 
as defined in Article 2 of the Convention 
means any technological application that 
uses biological systems, living organisms, 
or derivatives thereof, to make or modify 
products or processes for specific use”.
On the Nagoya Protocol, see also Box 31 below.
In this context, it has been suggested that the “utilization of 
derivatives” may also be covered by aforementioned defini-
tions.9 From one perspective, the definition of “derivative” 
expands the range of biochemicals that would be covered 
by ABS provisions beyond those that are GRs in a strict 
sense. If so, that such naturally occurring biochemicals may 
or may not contain “functional units of heredity” becomes 
essentially irrelevant for the purpose of ABS regulation – for 
example, the subject matter could be covered by access 
measures even if it does not contain DNA or RNA. In other 
words, the extraction of chemicals from a GR for the de -
velopment of drugs could be included, and benefit-sharing 
would be supported by the Nagoya Protocol.10
However, there is no universal consensus on the situation of 
“isolated derivatives” that have not been accessed simulta-
neously with the GRs.11 Moreover, the current definition of 
“derivatives” may exclude, for instance, synthetic analogue 
chemicals that are merely inspired by a particular naturally 
occurring metabolite or gene segment.12
Indeed, the inclusion of a specific definition of the 
term “derivative” in the law is likely to limit the possible 
range of derivatives that would be covered by a PDR.
Andean Community: Article 26 of Decision No. 
486 Establishing the Common Industrial Property 
Regime 2000 provides: 
“[W]here applicable, a copy of the access contract 
[should be provided] where the products or processes 
for which a patent is sought have been obtained or 
developed from genetic resources or products derived 
therefrom of which any of the member countries is 
the country of origin.”

30
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
A reference to GRs alone could instead exclude the ap -
plication of a PDR where the subject matter or claimed 
invention neither includes utilization of nor is directly based 
on material containing DNA/RNA (for example, an invention 
based on a naturally occurring protein would not be covered 
per se – i.e., when no use was made of the GR from which 
it was initially derived).
Germany: Section 34(a) of Patent Act (as amended 
by the Law of July 31, 2009) states: 
“Should an invention be based on biological material 
of plant or animal origin or if such material is used 
therefor, the patent application is to include information 
on the geographical origin of such material, if known.”
However, contracts such as material transfer agreements 
(MTAs) which are used for the acquisition of biological and 
research materials may be required as part of the initial 
access procedure in the providing country. In such cases, a 
disclosure requirement or other reporting requirements could 
be introduced as a contractual obligation under the initial 
access agreement, rather than through specific provisions 
under patent law in the user country. However, the recogni-
tion, interpretation and application of contractual obligations 
across different jurisdictions raise private international law 
issues whose resolution might not always guarantee uni -
form outcomes in different user countries. 13 Nonetheless, 
ABS contracts may mandate the disclosure of origin or 
source, including for derivative products, as a contractual 
obligation – e.g., whenever a patent application is filed in 
foreign jurisdictions, regardless of whether the laws of such 
countries provide for the disclosure of derivatives or not.14
Box 18: Contract law: “derived product” under MTAs
An MTA will commonly establish a contractual 
relationship between provider and user, and this 
will often govern subsequent use of material 
derived from the GR as received (including 
ownership, licensing or other aspects of patent 
rights on products derived from the GR). This leads 
to a wide range of approaches to characterizing the 
link between GR or TK and a patented invention, 
including in terms of a “derivative product”.
The WIPO Technical Study, p.39.

31
9. Content
What might be the possible content of 
disclosure?
A disclosure obligation may require applicants to indicate 
one or more of the following categories of information (under 
various circumstances):
• the country of origin of GRs, if any,1 and/or TK;
• the (direct) source of the GRs and/or TK;
• the legal status of GRs and/or TK (i.e., their legal provenance), 
in particular compliance with ABS requirements including 
PIC and evidence that MAT have been established; or
• a mere due diligence declaration that the applicant has 
complied with all applicable legal requirements concerning 
access to and use of GRs and/or TK.
In this context, the concept of “source” has been broadly 
defined to include, for instance, the actual source of the 
GR/TK, the country of origin (e.g., to clarify under which 
jurisdiction the source material was obtained) or a more 
specific location.
Philippines: Rule 12 of Implementing Rules and 
Regulations of the Republic Act No. 10055 (Joint 
Administrative Order No. 02-2010) requires written 
disclosure of: 
“The primary source of any biodiversity, genetic 
resources or materials, associated traditional knowl-
edge, and indigenous knowledge, systems and 
practices utilized in or which formed as basis in the 
subject matter contained in the IPR application; or 
the secondary source, if no information about the 
primary source is available.”
In some legal systems, in addition to disclosure of origin 
and/or source, applicants may be required to disclose 
important elements of the legal context in which GRs and/
or TK were accessed. This may entail showing that GRs 
and/or TK used in the invention were obtained and used in 
compliance with applicable laws in the country of origin or 
with the terms of any specific agreement recording PIC or 
providing evidence that benefit-sharing had been agreed 
to through the conclusion of MAT.
Egypt: Article 3.3 of Council of Ministers Resolution 
No. 1366 of 2003 issuing Implementing Regulations 
for Law No. 82 of 2002 on the Protection of Intellectual 
Property Rights Books One, Two and Four, provides:
“[…] Where the application relates to an invention 
or utility model involving plant or animal biological 
material, traditional medicinal, agricultural, industrial 
or handicraft knowledge, or cultural or environmental 
heritage, [the patent application] shall be accompa-
nied by documentation proving that the inventor has 
accessed the source from which the material was 
obtained in a legitimate manner, according to the 
legislation applicable in the Arab Republic of Egypt.”
MTAs are also frequently considered as a substantial part 
of the access procedure. Such contracts can therefore be 
used to provide evidence in order to fulfil a patent disclo -
sure obligation. MTAs can either be a mandatory element 
of the applicable access procedure or their use may simply 
be a common practice of the provider institutions. MTAs 
establish a contractual relationship between the provider 
of GRs/TK and the prospective user of such resources 
or knowledge. They often govern the subsequent use of 
materials derived from the GRs that were initially received 
(including ownership, licensing or other aspects of patent 
rights on products derived from the GR).
National laws may accept a simple MTA signed with the di-
rect provider entity or institution as proof of compliance with 
an applicable PDR. However, some countries may require 
enhanced disclosure that also includes information about 
the country of origin and the source as well as the provision 
of an internationally recognized certificate of compliance 
or an equivalent proof of legal provenance or acquisition of 
the relevant GRs/TK. (For more details, see also section 17, 
pp.50-51, below on issues related to the Nagoya Protocol.)
Andean Community: Article 26 of Decision No. 486 
Establishing the Common Industrial Property Regime 
(2000) states that a patent application shall contain:
“[a] copy of the contract for access, if the products or 
processes for which a patent application is being filed 
were obtained or developed from genetic resources 
or byproducts originating in one of the Member 
Countries; […] if applicable, a copy of the document 
that certifies the license or authorization to use the 
traditional knowledge of indigenous, African American, 
or local communities in the Member Countries where 
the products or processes whose protection is being 
requested [were] obtained or developed on the basis 
of the knowledge originating in any one of the Member 
Countries, pursuant to the provisions of Decision 
391 and its effective amendments and regulations.”

32
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
South Africa: Section 30 of the Patent Law (as 
amended in 2005) provides: 
“Every applicant who lodges an application for a pat-
ent accompanied by a complete specification shall, 
before acceptance of the application, lodge with the 
registrar a statement in the prescribed manner stating 
whether or not the invention for which protection is 
claimed is based on or derived from an indigenous 
biological resource, genetic resource, or traditional 
knowledge or use. The registrar shall call upon the 
applicant to furnish proof in the prescribed manner 
as to his or her title or authority to make use of the 
indigenous biological resource, genetic resource, or 
of the traditional knowledge or use if an applicant 
lodges a statement that acknowledges that the in-
vention for which protection is claimed is based on 
or derived from an indigenous biological resource, 
genetic resource, or traditional knowledge or use.”

33
10. Geographical scope
What is the geographical scope of 
disclosure?
National laws on PDRs may follow one of three broad 
approaches to the geographical scope of disclosure. The 
requirement can be applied:
i. nationally (i.e., only in respect of GRs and/or TK which 
are considered to be subject to the national jurisdiction 
of the country that provides for the PDR);
ii. on the basis of the principle of reciprocity (e.g., a club 
approach); or
iii. universally (i.e., independently of where the GR and/or 
TK were initially sourced from).
National scope
Several countries apply PDRs only to GRs and TK that 
originate within their own territory. The impact of such 
PDRs may be rather limited, since a patent applicant who 
files an application for an invention that is based on a GR 
or TK originating from outside the jurisdiction where the 
application is filed will not be subject to the requirement.
Ethiopia: Article 17 of the Access to Genetic Resources 
and Community Knowledge, and Community Rights 
Proclamation No. 482/2006 states:
“A person who shall be given an access permit shall 
have the following obligations: […] (12) where he seeks 
to acquire intellectual property right over the genetic 
resources accessed or parts thereof, negotiate new 
agreement with the Institute based on the relevant 
laws of Ethiopia; (13) not apply for a patent or any other 
intellectual property protection over the community 
knowledge accessed without first obtaining explicit 
written consent from the Institute; […]”
Costa Rica: Article 80 of Law No. 7788 on Biodiversity 
(as last amended by Law No. 8686 of November 21, 
2008) requires patent applications to be accompa-
nied by a certificate of origin and prior consent, but 
this only applies if the resources or knowledge are 
from Costa Rica:
“Both the National Seed Office and the Registers 
of Intellectual and Industrial Property are obliged to 
consult with the Technical Office of the Commission 
before granting protection of intellectual or industrial 
property to innovations involving components of 
biodiversity. They must always provide the certifi -
cate of origin issued by the Technical Office of the 
Commission and the prior consent.”
Scope based on reciprocity or club approach
Some countries apply PDRs not only to their own GRs or 
TK, but also to GRs or TK that originate from within the 
territory of other countries that provide for the same kind 
of PDRs (absolute reciprocity) or for minimum standards 
of compliance with ABS legislation that are equivalent to 
those applied domestically (a club approach). This approach 
usually reflects a previous arrangement such as a regional 
or international framework establishing some form of reci-
procity among participating countries.
Box 19: PDRs based on absolute reciprocity between 
the countries of the Andean Community
Article 26(h) of Decision No. 486 Establishing the 
Common Industrial Property Regime (2000) states:
“Applications for patents shall be filed with 
the competent national office and shall 
contain: […] a copy of the contract for access, 
if the products or processes for which a patent 
application is being filed were obtained or 
developed from genetic resources or byproducts 
originating in one of the Member Countries.”
In countries that are parties to the Nagoya Protocol, the 
introduction of new PDRs as a checkpoint mechanism 
is only optional (see further section 17, pp.50-51, below). 
However, if such requirements are introduced then their 
scope of application should at least encompass, without 
discrimination, GRs originating from any other parties to the 
Nagoya Protocol. Thus, designation of a country’s patent/
IP office as a compliance checkpoint under Article 17 of 
the Nagoya Protocol is an example of a situation where 
the geographical scope of such PDR would be defined 
based on reciprocity and non-discrimination between the 
contracting parties.
Universal scope
Most legal systems that include PDRs already provide for 
universal disclosure of any GRs and TK used in the claimed 
invention, irrespective of the legal standards that are applied 
in the country of origin or provenance of the GRs or TK. 
Nonetheless, the applicability of specific ABS requirements 
in the jurisdiction of the country of origin or provenance 
may mean that the applicant is then required to present 
supplementary evidence to show that those requirements 
have actually been met.

34
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
People’s Republic of China: Article 26(5) of Patent 
Law Amendment, December 27, 2008, which entered 
into force in October 2009 states: 
“[…] for an invention-creation, the completion of which 
depends on genetic resources, the applicant shall 
indicate the direct source and original source of said 
genetic resources in the application documents; the 
applicant shall state reasons if the original source of 
said genetic resources cannot be indicated.”
Samoa: Article 7 of the Samoa IP Act (2011, No.9) 
requires patent applications to include: 
“[…] a statement stating whether or not the invention 
for which protection is claimed is based on knowledge 
available within any local or indigenous community 
whether from Samoa or elsewhere.”
Norway: Section 8(b) of the Patents Act No. 9 of 
December 15, 1967 (consolidated version of 2016) 
adopts a very detailed rule: 
“If an invention concerns or uses biological material, 
the patent application shall include information on the 
country from which the inventor collected or received 
the material (the providing country). If it follows from 
the national law in the providing country that access 
to biological material shall be subject to prior consent, 
the application shall state whether such consent has 
been obtained. If the providing country is not the same 
as the country of origin of the biological material, the 
application shall also state the country of origin. The 
country of origin means the country from which the 
material was collected from its natural environment. 
If the national law in the country of origin requires 
that access to biological material shall be subject 
to prior consent, the application shall state whether 
such consent has been obtained. If the information 
set out in this subsection is not known, the applicant 
shall state that.”
The ongoing negotiations at the WIPO IGC have been con-
sidering the introduction of internationally agreed norms 
for the harmonization of new PDRs which could potentially 
cover GRs and TK from all participating countries while also 
clarifying the legal nature of such requirements.

35
11. Exclusions
What exclusions from the material 
scope of application of a new PDR might 
be envisaged?
The CBD defines “genetic material” as any material of plant, 
animal, microbial or other origin containing functional units 
of heredity (see section 8 above). The definition of GRs then 
refers to genetic material of actual or potential value. However, 
human GRs are excluded from the scope of application of 
the CBD.1 This exclusion has been carried over into various 
national legal systems in respect of PDRs.
Andean Community: Decision 486, Establishing the 
Common Industrial Property Regime, makes direct 
reference to Decision 3912 implementing the CBD, 
whereby human GRs are expressly excluded from 
its purview. In particular, Article 4 of Decision No. 
391 Establishing the Common Regime on Access 
to Genetic Resources (1996) states:
“The following are excluded from the scope of this 
Decision:
“(a) Human genetic resources and their by-products.”
Costa Rica: Article 4 of Costa Rica’s Biodiversity 
Law (BL) of May 27, 1998 provides: 
“This law will not apply to access to biochemical or 
genetic material of human origin, which will continue 
to be regulated by the General Health Law, No. 5395, 
of the 30th of October 1973, and by the connected 
laws.”
Nevertheless, from a scientific and technical standpoint, 
various human genetic materials, including samples taken 
from indigenous persons,3 may be used in or be at the origin 
of a patented invention.4 This issue has therefore also been 
addressed from a patent disclosure perspective by some 
national or regional laws:
Norway: Section 8(c) of the Patents Act No. 9 of 
December 15, 1967 (consolidated version of 2016) 
provides: 
“If an invention concerns or uses biological material 
from the human body, the patent application shall 
include information on whether the person from 
whom the material has been derived has given his/
her consent to the use of the biological material, in 
accordance with the law of 21st February 2003 no. 
12 about bio banks.”
EU: Directive 98/44/EC on the Legal Protection 
of Biotechnological Inventions of July 6, 1998 . In 
its Preamble, the Directive distinguishes between 
biological material of human origin and biological 
material of plant or animal origin, and encourages 
applicants to obtain free prior informed consent from 
the person who provided the material:
“(26) Whereas if an invention is based on biological 
material of human origin or if it uses such material, 
where a patent application is filed, the person from 
whose body the material is taken must have had an 
opportunity of expressing free and informed consent 
thereto, in accordance with national law.”
Besides the explicit exclusions concerning human 
GRs that can be found in some national laws, inter-
national discussions have also focused on whether 
there should be other exceptions and limitations 
to a new PDR and, if so, which ones. Examples of 
subject matter that has been proposed for exclusion 
include commodities or GRs when they are used 
as commodities, TK in the public domain5 and GRs 
from areas beyond national jurisdiction.6 The issue 
whether the application of a new PDR should be 
time bound, for example so as to exclude all GRs 
accessed or acquired before the entry into force 
of the CBD and/or the Nagoya Protocol, has been 
considered too.7 Furthermore, it has been suggested 
that an alternative approach would be to introduce 
public interest-related exceptions in more general 
terms, without the need to list such exceptions in 
great detail in relevant legal instruments.8

36
12. Triggers
What relationship or link between 
the subject matter of disclosure and 
the claimed invention will trigger the 
application of a new PDR?
In practice, the application of a new PDR depends on a 
“trigger” or link between the claimed invention and relevant 
GRs or TK – that is, the relationship with the subject matter 
of disclosure. In essence, the function of the trigger is to 
identify markers of “proximity” creating a boundary within 
which benefit-sharing requirements (and any related compli-
ance-monitoring obligations) will apply. In what circumstances 
should a patent examiner or other receiving office demand 
additional disclosure related to GRs or TK from the applicant?
Box 20: Qualitative methods to identify appropriate 
markers for triggering a new PDR
The trigger or link may relate to 
various issues, for example:
• whether the GR/TK is incidental or fundamental 
to the development of the invention;
• whether the GR/TK is necessary to assess, 
understand, replicate, or carry out the 
invention, or the GR/TK is in effect only a 
vehicle for a separate innovative concept;
• whether the GR/TK contributes to one 
earlier step in a chain of innovations that 
over time culminated in the invention, or is a 
direct input to the claimed inventive step;
• whether particular qualities of the GR/
TKs are essential to the invention;
• whether a GR is used in a particular embodiment 
or one example in a description of the 
invention, but is not indispensable to arrive 
at or replicate the invention as claimed.
The WIPO Technical Study (2004), p.2
In view of the above considerations, the trigger may be 
defined narrowly so as to exclude some of the more remote 
linkages between the claimed invention and underlying GRs/
TK or it may be defined in broad terms to encompass the 
greatest range of situations.
Three main broad categories of triggers may be identified 
in national laws. The new disclosure requirement may apply 
to any IP and/or patent right (or application and/or claimed 
invention, as appropriate and subject to national law) that:
i. includes the utilization of GRs/TK; or
ii. is derived from GRs/TK; or
iii. is based on GRs/TK or “directly” based on them.
The invention includes the utilization of GRs/TK
As explained earlier, the concept of “utilization of genetic 
resources” derives from the Nagoya Protocol. It is defined as 
“conduct[ing] research and development on the genetic and/
or biochemical composition of genetic resources, including 
through the application of biotechnology [...]”.1
Box 21: Background on definitions in the context 
of the Nagoya Protocol
To fully understand the definition of 
“utilization of GRs”, it is important to take 
a close look at these references included 
in Article 2(c) of the Nagoya Protocol:
• R&D;
• biochemical composition of GRs; and
• application of biotechnology.
The terms “research and development” are 
not defined in the Nagoya Protocol. Based 
on Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention on 
the Law of Treaties,2 the ordinary meaning 
of these terms in the context of the Nagoya 
Protocol is applicable. The Oxford Dictionaries 
definition of research is “the systematic 
investigation into and study of materials and 
sources in order to establish facts and reach 
new conclusions”.3 In particular, for the Nagoya 
Protocol “research” means the investigation 
and study of the genetic and/or biochemical 
composition of GRs in order to establish facts 
and reach conclusions. “Development” includes 
the creation of innovations and practical 
applications (e.g., applied research), including 
through the application of “biotechnology”. 
The expression “[…] utilization of genetic 
resources as well as subsequent applications 
and commercialization” is used to trigger fair 
and equitable benefit-sharing obligations under 
Article 5 of the Nagoya Protocol. In addition, 
patent/IP offices may be designated as possible 
checkpoints under Nagoya Protocol Article 17. 
These “[…] checkpoints would collect or receive, as 
appropriate, relevant information related to […] the 
utilization of genetic resources, as appropriate.”

37
Triggers
The use of the term “utilization of” GRs as the trigger for 
a new PDR obligation is consistent with the terminology 
used in the Nagoya Protocol. It may cover a broad range of 
upstream R&D activities on the genetic and/or biochemical 
composition of GRs which may or may not eventually result 
in the filing of a patent/IP application.4 Any of the activities 
that would trigger benefit-sharing and/or compliance-relat-
ed monitoring obligations under the Nagoya Protocol will 
then also trigger a disclosure obligation when an IP/patent 
application is filed.5

People’s Republic of China (PRC): Article 26 of the 
Patent Law of the PRC (as amended by the Decision 
of December 27, 2008, regarding the Revision of the 
Patent Law of the PRC) provides: 
“With regard to an invention-creation accomplished 
by relying on genetic resources, the applicant shall, 
in the patent application documents, indicate the 
direct and original source of the genetic resources.”
Relevant implementing rules also explain that the 
expression “the invention-creation accomplished 
by relying on genetic resources” refers to “[…] those 
invention-creation of which the accomplishment uses 
the genetic function of genetic resources”.
India: Section 10 of the Patents (Amendments) Act 
2002 states:
“Every complete specification shall […] disclose the 
source and geographical origin of the biological ma-
terial in the specification, when used in an invention.”
Norway: Section 8b of Patent Act No. 9 of December 
15, 1967 (consolidated version of 2016) provides: 
“If an invention concerns or uses biological material 
or traditional knowledge, the patent application shall 
include information on the country from which the 
inventor collected or received the material or the 
knowledge (the providing country). If it follows from 
the national law in the providing country that access 
to biological material or use of traditional knowledge 
shall be subject to prior consent, the application shall 
state whether such consent has been obtained.”
The invention is derived from GRs/TK
The use of the trigger “derived from” GRs/TK could possibly 
be the broadest of the three trigger categories. In the ab -
sence of a specific definition, the term could be interpreted 
to encompass different things, ranging from direct physical 
derivation from a GR – that is, when the genetic material 
is physically incorporated into the final product, such as 
in the case of “essentially derived varieties” under UPOV 
19916 – to any synthetic biology product that is created 
using gene sequence data simply obtained from an online 
repository or database (such as a DNA library), and anything 
in between these two.
Andean Community: Article 26 of Decision No. 
486 Establishing the Common Industrial Property 
Regime (2000) states: 
“Applications for patents shall be filed with the com-
petent national office and shall contain: […] (h) a 
copy of the contract for access, if the products or 
processes for which a patent application is being filed 
were obtained or developed from genetic resources 
or byproducts originating in one of the Member 
Countries; (i) if applicable, a copy of the document 
that certifies the license or authorization to use the 
traditional knowledge of indigenous, African American, 
or local communities in the Member Countries where 
the products or processes whose protection is being 
requested was obtained or developed on the basis of 
the knowledge originating in any one of the Member 
Countries, pursuant to the provisions of Decision 391 
and its effective amendments and regulations […].” 
If the subject matter of a disclosure obligation encompasses 
TK, the notion of “consciousness” may acquire particular 
significance where the invention was “consciously derived 
from TK”.
Philippines: Rule 12 Section 3 (c) of the Implementing 
Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 10055 
(Joint Administrative Order No. 02-2010) provides: 
“[…] The subject matter contained in the IPR applica-
tion must depend on the specific properties of, or must 
be consciously derived from, such biodiversity and 
genetic resources or materials, traditional knowledge, 
and indigenous knowledge, systems and practice.”
In such cases, the above notion would exclude any strict 
liability for lack of disclosure of TK that may be unknown to 
the applicant and for any independent discovery. It would 
also shift the burden of proof – that there is, in actual fact, 
a conscious act of derivation – from the applicant to the 
patent/IP office or any other competent authorities. However, 
the notion of consciousness may also be relevant when 
the subject matter of disclosure encompasses exclusively 
a gene-based invention (that is, independently of any TK 
lead). This is due to the fact that “[…] there are significant 
genetic similarities or ‘homologies’ across species, genera 
and classes of organism.”7 On the face of it, a consciousness 
requirement may well exclude a “proximity” marker for patent 
disclosure for the most broadly drafted, all-encompassing 

38
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
claims in relation to DNA and genes (e.g., those claims with 
a reach well beyond the specific GR that might have been 
at the origin of the claimed invention).
The invention is based on GRs/TK or “directly” 
based on such resources/knowledge
Review of national laws reveals that the concepts of “directly 
based on” or simply “based on” GRs/TK are widely used 
as a trigger.
Samoa: Article 7 of the Samoa IP Act states:
“3) An application must contain the following:
“[…] (g) a statement stating whether or not the in -
vention for which protection is claimed is based on 
knowledge available within any local or indigenous 
community whether from Samoa or elsewhere;
“[…]
“10) […] if the application is based on or derived from 
biological material or knowledge available within 
any local or indigenous community the Registrar 
may direct the applicant to furnish evidence as to 
the applicant’s title or authority to make use of such 
material or knowledge.”
Viet Nam: Article 23.11 of Circular 01/2007/TT-BKHCN 
of February 14, 2007, Guiding the Implementation 
of the Government’s Decree No. 103/2006/ND-CP 
of September 22, 2006, Detailing and Guiding the 
Implementation of a Number of Articles of the Law 
on Intellectual Property Regarding Industrial Property 
provides: 
“Additional provisions applicable to applications for 
registration of inventions concerning gene source or 
traditional knowledge
“Apart from the general requirements for invention 
registration applications specified at Points 23.1 thru 
23.7 of this Circular, an application for registration of 
an invention concerning gene source or traditional 
knowledge must also contain documents explain -
ing the origin of the gene source and/or traditional 
knowledge accessed by the inventor or the applicant, 
if the invention is directly based on that gene source 
and/or traditional knowledge.”
Switzerland: Article 49 of the Amendment of Patent 
Law of June 2, 2007, RO 2008 2551 provides:
“For inventions based on genetic resources or tradi-
tional knowledge the patent application must contain 
information concerning the source:
“(a) of the genetic resources to which the inventor or 
the applicant had access, when the invention is 
based directly on that resource;
“(b) of traditional knowledge of indigenous or local 
communities related to the genetic resources to 
which the inventor or applicant had access, when 
the invention is based directly on that knowledge.”
The notion that the invention must be “directly based on” 
GRs/TK appears to be possibly the narrowest trigger. While 
there is currently no definition of the above expression in 
international law, some countries that support the use of 
such a trigger have indicated their preference for interpreting 
“directly based on” to mean that the invention must make 
immediate use of the GR; in other words, the invention 
must depend on the specific properties of the GR to which 
the inventor must have had physical access – the inventor 
must have been in possession of the genetic material or 
must at least have had contact with it sufficient to identify 
the properties of the GR that are relevant to the invention.8
This raises the question of whether physical access to 
the subject matter is necessary to trigger the disclosure 
requirement or whether access to non-tangible subject 
matter (e.g., through a gene sequence data repository) 
might also suffice. The narrow interpretation of this trigger 
would potentially exclude the application of a disclosure 
requirement for subject matter and/or inventions that are 
simply based on (or obtained by accessing) a non-tangible 
source of bio-information.

39
13. Remedies and sanctions
What kinds of remedies and sanctions 
are available to address issues of non- 
compliance with any new PDRs?
A wide range of remedies and sanctions for non-compli -
ance are provided under national laws. In some countries, 
non- compliance with a PDR may have no immediate con-
sequences for the examination and granting of a patent 
application or its enforcement once the patent is granted, 
but remedies and sanctions may be imposed under civil, 
administrative and criminal laws. In other countries, by con-
trast, non-compliance may have major implications either 
during the patent application process or in determining the 
status of a granted patent (e.g., when enforcement is sought 
by the patent holder).
Box 22: Consequences of failure to comply
[…] failure to meet these [PDRs] can lead to 
significant sanctions, ranging from penalties for 
false, misleading or fraudulent statements, to 
refusal, invalidation or transfer of the patent right.
The WIPO Technical Study, p.50.
The available remedies and sanctions can be divided into 
two broad categories:
• those that operate within the immediate purview of the 
patent system and have implications for the prosecution 
or validity of patents; and
• those that do not have such implications, such as civil, 
administrative or criminal remedies and sanctions.
However, some countries may simply decide not to provide 
any PDR-related remedies or sanctions at all; in other words, 
no measures will be directly triggered if a PDR is not met. 
Even then, other measures to promote compliance with ABS 
requirements can be made available. Detailed analysis of 
such other measures is beyond the purview of this study, 
but an example is those provided under EU Regulation 
No. 511/2014.
EU: Regulation No. 511/2014 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on 
compliance measures for users from the Nagoya 
Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the 
Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from 
their Utilization in the Union provides: 
“Article 9. Checks on user compliance
“9. […] where, following the checks referred to in […] 
this Article, shortcomings have been detected, the 
competent authority shall issue a notice of remedial 
action or measures to be taken by the user. Depending 
on the nature of the shortcomings, Member States 
may also take immediate interim measures.
“[…]
“Article 11. Penalties
“1. Member States shall lay down the rules on penalties 
applicable to infringements of Articles 4 [on obligations 
of users] and 7 [on monitoring user compliance] and 
shall take all the measures necessary to ensure that 
they are applied.
“2. The penalties provided for shall be effective, 
proportionate and dissuasive. […]”
Remedies and sanctions
Pre-grant remedies
Stay of proceedings and other pre-grant sanctions
A failure to meet disclosure or documentation requirements 
within a specified time frame during the patent application 
phase may result in the halting of the application process-
ing procedure. The normal procedure is that if an office 
checks the formal and/or substantive requirements, and 
non-compliance with them is found, the office invites the 
applicant to rectify the defect within a certain time period. 
During that period the procedure is put on hold.
For instance, if the applicant is invited to provide evidence 
of PIC and MAT or the source of a GR to comply with a 
formality requirement, the procedure will resume once they 
submit the evidence in compliance with the patent office 
requirements. But if they do not provide it, the application 
is deemed to be withdrawn or rejected.

40
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Italy: Article 170- bis, paragraph 7, of Industrial 
Property Code (Legislative Decree No. 30 of February 
10, 2005, as amended up to Legislative Decree No. 
131 of August 13, 2010) provides: 
“If the Italian Patent and Trademark Office ascertains 
the lack of the conditions for patenting a biotechno-
logical invention or the failure to file the declarations 
under paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, it shall proceed in ac-
cordance with Article 173, paragraph 7 [see below], 
and in the event [that] it determines the absence of 
the conditions for patenting […], it shall reject the 
application.”1
Article 173, paragraph 7 provides:
“Before rejecting in full or in part an application or a 
related request, […] the Italian Patent and Trademark 
Office assigns the applicant a term of two months to 
submit observations. Once that term has expired, if 
no observations have been submitted or if the Office 
does not believe that it can accept those submitted, 
the application or request is rejected in full or in part.”
Switzerland: Article 59a of Federal Act of June 25, 
1954 on Patents for Inventions (status as of January 
1, 2017) states:
“If the patent application does not meet the other 
requirements of this Act or the Ordinance, the Institute 
shall set a time limit for the patent applicant by which 
the deficiencies must be remedied.
“The Institute shall reject the patent application if […]
b. the deficiencies mentioned in Article 59 paragraph 
2[2] have not been remedied.”
Samoa: Article 7 of the Samoa IP Act (2011, No. 9) 
provides:
“[…] if the application is based on or derived from 
biological material or knowledge available within 
any local or indigenous community the Registrar 
may direct the applicant to furnish evidence as to 
the applicant’s title or authority to make use of such 
material or knowledge.
“If an applicant fails to provide evidence […], the 
Registrar may cease to deal further with the appli -
cation.”
For the effective functioning of the patent system, it is im-
portant to allow an opportunity to remedy defects in patent 
applications, particularly for unintentional or non-willful vio-
lations of disclosure obligations depending on the good faith 
and diligence of the applicant. Thus, the patent office may 
subsequently lift the stay and resume proceedings based 
on the disclosure or submission. This may be regarded as 
an “amendment” of the patent application that is prompted 
by the receiving office.
Andean Community: Article 39 of Decision No. 
486 Establishing the Common Industrial Property 
Regime (2000) provides: 
“If it emerges from the examination as to form that the 
application does not meet the conditions specified 
in Articles 26 and 27, the competent national office 
shall inform the applicant accordingly, so that he may 
meet those conditions within a period of two months 
following the date of notification. That period may be 
extended once by an equal amount at a request of 
a party without any loss of priority.
“If, on the expiry of the period specified, the applicant 
has not met the conditions mentioned, the application 
shall be considered abandoned and its priority shall be 
lost. The competent national office shall nevertheless 
respect the confidentiality of the application.”
Amendments of a patent application may be also sponta -
neously introduced by the applicant. Usually, the applicant 
is allowed to rectify any defect that leads to non-compliance 
with the requirements under the applicable law within a 
certain period of time. However, if the effect of an amend-
ment introduces new substantive technical matter about 
the invention, not disclosed by the applicant on the filing 
date, such an amendment is not allowed.
Pre-grant opposition
Many national and regional patent systems provide opposition 
mechanisms which aim to improve the quality of patents 
by giving third parties the opportunity to oppose the grant 
of a patent within a certain period of time. Under a pre-
grant opposition procedure, third parties may (depending 
on the precise national or regional law) raise the issue of 
non-compliance with PDRs or ABS requirements against 
the grant of a patent after the patent application has been 
published, but before a patent is granted.
Patent examiners have limited time and resources, and may 
not always have access to the best search tools to identify 
prior art. Therefore, pre-grant opposition may improve 
regulatory efficiency and accuracy by bringing prior art in 
general, as well as specific information on GRs and TK, to 
the attention of patent examiners.3
India: Article 25 of Patent (Amendment) Act 2005 
provides for pre-grant opposition: 

41
Remedies and sanctions
“(1) Where an application for a patent has been 
published but a patent has not been granted, any 
person may, in writing, represent by way of opposi-
tion to the Controller against the grant of patent on 
the ground […] (j) that the complete specification 
does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source 
or geographical origin of biological material used for 
the invention; […] the Controller shall, if requested by 
such person for being heard, hear him and dispose 
of such representation in such manner and within 
such period as may be prescribed.”
Andean Community: Article 42 of Decision 
No. 486 Establishing the Common Industrial Property 
Regime (2000) provides: 
“Within a period of 60 days following the publication 
date, any person having a legitimate interest may file 
one reasoned opposition contesting the patentability 
of the invention.”
Post-grant remedies
Even if a failure to meet disclosure requirements does not 
have immediate consequences during examination, it may 
have major implications for the patent later on (i.e., when it 
is in force). Some view post-grant remedies as providing a 
necessary incentive to comply with new PDRs.
Non-compliance with new PDRs as a ground for 
revocation: annulment
If disclosure is inadequate or omits important information, 
failure to discharge the disclosure obligation may in some 
cases lead to the rejection or the subsequent invalidation 
of patent claims that are directly related to such disclosure 
or would need to be supported by the information that was 
not disclosed.
Andean Community: Article 75 of Decision No. 
486 Establishing the Common Industrial Property 
Regime (2000) provides: 
“The competent national authority shall decree the 
absolute invalidity of a patent at any time, either ex 
officio or at the request of any person, where:
“[…]
“(g) a copy of the access contract has not been filed 
where the products or processes to which the patent 
application relates have been produced or developed 
with genetic resources or derived products of which 
any of the member countries is the country of origin;
“(h) a copy of the document evidencing the licensing 
or authorization of the use of traditional knowledge of 
the indigenous Afro-American or local communities 
of the member countries has not been filed where 
the products or processes for which protection is 
sought have been produced or developed on the 
basis of such knowledge of which one of the member 
countries is the country of origin.”
South Africa: Section 61 of the Patents Amendment 
Act 2005 (Act No. 20 of 2005) states: 
“Any person may at any time apply in the prescribed 
manner for the revocation of a patent on any of the 
following grounds only, namely […] that the prescribed 
declaration lodged in respect of the application for 
the patent or the statement lodged in terms of sec-
tion 30(3A) [concerning the disclosure requirement] 
contains a false statement or representation which 
is material and which the patentee knew or ought 
reasonably to have known to be false at the time 
when the declaration statement or representation 
was made.”
PDRs and compensatory liability
In some cases disclosure requirements may not affect the 
substantive requirements relating to patentability of the 
invention or the entitlement of the applicant to receive or 
enforce a patent. However, they may be linked to distinct 
legal mechanisms, including in foreign jurisdictions; they may 
be aimed at monitoring or enforcing regulations or specific 
contracts; and they may eventually provide for compulsory 
benefit-sharing through a compensatory liability rule4, as is 
the case in Vanuatu.
Vanuatu: Article 47 of Patents Act No. 2 of 2003 
provides: 
“The Registrar must not grant a patent for an inven-
tion that is based on, arose out of, or incorporates 
elements of, indigenous knowledge unless:
“(2)(a) the custom owners of the indigenous knowl-
edge have given their prior informed consent to the 
grant; and

42
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
“(2)(b) the applicant and the custom owners have 
entered into an agreement on the payment by the 
applicant to the custom owners of an equitable share 
of the benefits from exploiting the patent.
“(4) […] If an agreement mentioned in subsection (2) 
[…] has not been entered into within 12 months after 
the patent application has been lodged:
“(a) the Registrar may grant the patent; and 
“(b) the owner may exploit the patent; and
“(c) the Registrar is to determine the amount payable 
to the custom owners or the National Council of 
Chiefs by the owner of the patent, being pay -
ment of an equitable share of the benefits from 
exploiting the patent.”
Civil, administrative and criminal remedies and 
sanctions
Sanctions outside the patent system vary among countries 
depending on their national legal traditions and practices. A 
failure to comply with PDRs may incur serious civil, adminis-
trative and criminal remedies such as penalties for provision 
of false information on public documents, particularly when 
information is withheld with fraudulent intent.
Switzerland: Article 81(a) of the Federal Act of 
June 25, 1954 on Patents for Inventions (status as of 
January 1, 2017) provides a fine for wrongful provision 
of false information but not patent invalidation: 
“Any person who willfully provides false information 
under Article 49(a) [on disclosure of source] is liable 
to a fine of up to 100,000 francs. The court may order 
the publication of the judgment.”
Norway: Section 8(b) of the Patents Act No. 9 of 
December 15, 1967 (consolidated version of 2016) 
provides: 
“Breach of the duty to disclose information is subject 
to penalty in accordance with the General Civil Penal 
Code § 166. The duty to disclose information is without 
prejudice to the processing of patent applications or 
the validity of rights arising from granted patents.”
Depending on how they are designed and implemented, 
such civil law measures (e.g., claims for compensation) or 
administrative and criminal penalties (e.g., fines for refusal 
to submit information to the authorities or for submitting 
wrong information) may have limited effect as a deterrent.
For example, based on a cost-benefit analysis, a company 
may consciously prefer to run the risk of paying a fine at a 
later stage rather than comply with a disclosure requirement 
and meet the underlying ABS requirements in the country 
of origin, unless the fine is substantially higher than the 
estimated upfront transaction costs associated with the 
negotiation and conclusion of an ABS agreement.
Other relevant factors: good faith versus strict 
liability
Disclosure obligations may require patent applicants to 
prosecute their applications with candor, good faith and 
honesty (i.e., duty to disclose known prior art material to 
a patent claim).
In regard to PDRs, the intent of the applicant – in other words, 
whether a failure to provide relevant information was in good 
faith or fraudulent – may also become a significant factor. It 
may also be important to clarify where the burden of proof 
lies, that is, to determine whether the applicant is positively 
obliged to prove that access to GRs and associated TK 
meet a certain standard or whether legitimacy of access is 
assumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary.
If a strict liability rule applies then an applicant who fails to 
comply with a disclosure requirement will be subject to specific 
remedies or sanctions even if they were acting in good faith. 
But, in other cases, such as in respect of granted patents, the 
courts generally possess adequate authority and capacity to 
require testimony and the production of documents that may 
be needed to determine good faith or fraudulent intention. If 
the patent holder proves that they have acted in good faith 
or that the failure to comply was due to a cause outside their 
control and which could not be reasonably foreseen, the court 
may decide that, absent any fraudulent behavior, they should 
not face sanctions for that non-compliance.
South Africa: Section 61 of the Patents Amendment 
Act 2005 (Act No. 20 of 2005) provides:
“Any person may at any time apply in the prescribed 
manner for the revocation of a patent on any of 
the following grounds only, namely […] (g) that the 
prescribed declaration lodged in respect of the ap-
plication for the patent or the statement lodged in 
terms of section 30(3A) contains a false statement 
or representation which is material and which the 
patentee knew or ought reasonably to have known to 
be false at the time when the declaration statement 
or representation was made.”
No remedies or sanctions directly linked to the 
enforcement of a PDR
In some countries, there may be no remedies or sanctions 
directly linked to the enforcement of a PDR as such, other 
than standard patent invalidation proceedings.5

43
14. Evidence
What evidence might be submitted 
in the context of new PDR-related 
compliance mechanisms and 
procedures?
The petitioner in patent opposition proceedings has the 
burden of proof to establish the basis of their claim by a 
preponderance of the evidence. Such evidence usually relates 
to the particulars specified in the statement of grounds. It 
may comprise printed publications and other documents 
on prior art references which have been made available to 
the public by means of written or oral description or use, 
information about the claims of the opposed application or, 
in relevant cases, information regarding PIC or MAT.
Pre-grant opposition allows ABS authorities, IPLCs and 
other relevant stakeholders to oppose a patent application 
by submitting information and analysis to patent examiners, 
under an adversarial administrative process (see also sec-
tion 13, p.41). This may help the collection and evaluation 
of information on prior art, facilitate access to non-patent 
literature and improve patent quality and the accuracy of 
patent claims. The patent applicant should be given the 
opportunity to correct mistakes in the description or other 
relevant application documents by clarifying points that 
are unclear, changing claim dependencies, or providing 
a certificate of legal provenance or compliance with ABS 
requirements, as appropriate. If the applicant does amend 
the claims, the challenger may reply with new evidence in 
response.
In post-grant patent invalidation cases, the petitioner will 
need to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, facts 
demonstrating the patent’s invalidity (see also section 13, 
pp.41-42). While requirements and conditions of what can be 
submitted as evidence vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, 
such evidence must generally be sufficiently clear, convinc-
ing and well established to rebut the usual presumption of 
patent validity once a patent has been granted. Existing prior 
art (patents, published patent applications and non-patent 
literature), and non-documentary evidence such as public 
use or TK practices which were documented before the 
filing date, can be submitted as evidence.
By a way of illustration, opposition proceedings may be 
initiated against a European patent within nine months after 
its grant. During the opposition procedure, any of the parties, 
including the EPO examiners, can request oral proceedings. 
These provide an opportunity to discuss matters raised in 
proceedings and settle outstanding questions.1

44
15. Standing
Who might have a right to take legal 
action for non-compliance with a new 
PDR?
In the context of PDR-related compliance procedures, “locus 
standi” (or “standing”) can be described as the right of a 
person, entity or identified group (such as in class actions) to:
• initiate legal action to address an alleged situation of non-
compliance with a PDR or to vindicate rights that would 
suffer prejudice from the alleged misconduct; and/or
• be heard and provide evidence of alleged misconduct by 
the patent applicant in the context of such procedures.
In addition, in the case of new PDRs, the actual IP/patent 
authority may be acting as if it had standing, in the interest of 
the State, when it demands disclosure of origin or evidence 
of legal provenance from the applicant. In case of non-dis-
closure or wrongful disclosure of the required information, 
a petitioner opposing a patent may be required to prove 
that they have legal standing in the narrow sense, that is, 
to show a concrete stake in the patent at issue (such as 
being an infringer, a licensee, or a potential licensee). The 
immediate interest of ABS authorities, TK holders and any 
interested party in challenging the patent application and/
or the granted patent may also be recognized.
Patent opposition procedures may be open to any natural or 
legal person, and not limited only to interested parties such 
as potential competitors or researchers in a field relating to 
the claimed invention. Some patent laws provide substantive 
grounds in which “any person” is able to oppose a proposed 
patent and its validity.
India: Article 25 of the Patent (Amendment) Act 2005 
provides for pre-grant opposition by any person: 
“Where an application for a patent has been pub -
lished but a patent has not been granted, any person 
may, in writing, represent by way of opposition to the 
Controller against the grant of patent on the ground 
[…] (j) that the complete specification does not dis-
close or wrongly mentions the source or geographical 
origin of biological material used for the invention; 
[and] (k) that the invention so far as claimed in any 
claim of the complete specification is anticipated 
having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise, 
available within any local or indigenous community 
in India or elsewhere.”
Andean Community: Article 42 of Decision No. 
486 Establishing the Common Industrial Property 
Regime (2000) provides:
“Within a period of 60 days following the publication 
date, any person having a legitimate interest may file 
one reasoned opposition contesting the patentability 
of the invention.”
South Africa: Section 61(1) of the Patents Amendment 
Act 2005 (Act No. 20 of 2005) provides:
“Any person may at any time apply in the prescribed 
manner for the revocation of a patent […]”
In countries in which IP offices rely on decisions made by 
biodiversity-related authorities in order to certify that ABS 
conditions have been fulfilled, those authorities may have 
specific standing to oppose the granting of patents.
Costa Rica: Article 80 of the Biodiversity Law of 
1998 provides:
“Justified opposition from the Technical Office will 
prohibit registration of a patent or protection of the 
innovation.”
Andean Community: Article 75 of Decision No. 
486 Establishing the Common Industrial Property 
Regime (2000) provides: 
“The competent national authority shall decree the 
absolute invalidity of a patent at any time, either ex 
officio or at the request of any person, where [spec-
ified conditions are not met].”
TK holders and IPLCs may also have standing to initiate 
opposition proceedings against a patent application or a 
granted patent.

45
Standing
Box 23: African geranium (the pelargonium patent)
Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co KG (Schwabe), 
a German company, obtained a patent for 
a method of producing extracts of South 
African pelargonium plants at the EPO in 2007. 
Pelargonium plants are commonly known as 
“African geranium” and are used by indigenous 
communities throughout south-eastern South 
Africa to treat inflammatory diseases and 
infections. The patent was opposed by the African 
Centre for Biosafety from South Africa, acting 
on behalf of a rural community in Alice, in the 
Eastern Cape, in collaboration with a Swiss non-
governmental organization known as the Berne 
Declaration (now renamed Public Eye).1 The EPO 
revoked the patent for lack of inventive step. TK 
relating to the therapeutic characteristics of 
pelargonium was historically known to a number 
of communities in south-eastern Southern Africa, 
crossing tribal and national boundaries. The 
African Centre for Biosafety did not claim exclusive 
ownership or rights as knowledge holders; 
however, they asserted that the TK concerned was 
known among a number of communities. This 
was deemed a sufficient ground to support their 
legal standing as indigenous knowledge holders. 2
If there is no explicit ground for opposition under 
national law, the validity of a patent may not easily be 
challenged by TK holders and indigenous communities 
once it has been granted. Complex foreign legal rules 
(such as legal standing for opposition, the burden of 
proof and a strong presumption of patent validity) 
and the high costs of taking legal action – possibly 
in a foreign jurisdiction – may also prevent them from 
taking further action. In sum, the construction of legal 
standing rights determines who may have access to the 
remedies available to redress the harm caused by an 
alleged misappropriation of GRs and/or TK (as defined 
under national law) or an erroneously granted patent.

46
16. Capacity
What legal, institutional and policy 
capacities might be needed to 
implement a new PDR?
The implementation of a new PDR requires, on one hand, 
a plan to be drawn up in accordance with the nature of the 
obligation to disclose described in section 5, and, on the 
other, instruments and resources to carry out that plan. The 
instruments and resources required to implement PDRs can 
be grouped into four categories:
i. institutional framework
ii. examination capacity
iii. information technologies
iv. human and financial resources.
Institutional framework
The introduction of a new PDR will usually place new pro-
cedural and/or documentation obligations on the applicant, 
such as the obligation to provide the patent authorities 
with a certificate of origin, an access contract or license, 
or other documentation supporting the assertion that PIC 
has been obtained and that subsequent R&D were legit -
imately undertaken (e.g., in accordance with established 
MAT). Depending on the kind of obligation placed upon the 
applicant (see section 6 above on formal and substantive 
requirements) and the consequences of failure to comply 
(see section 13 above on remedies and sanctions), imple-
menting a PDR may entail the development of significant 
tracking and verification mechanisms.
In addition, compliance with a requirement to meet a sub-
stantive standard may need to be substantively assessed 
by the granting office, potentially requiring a consultative 
framework for structured dialogue between competent 
agencies.
Box 24: Indian Institutional Framework
The National Biodiversity Authority is the 
national competent authority for the decisions 
related to ABS including PIC and prior 
approval for applying for IP based on GRs and 
TK obtained from India. All IP applications 
in regard to biological resources require the 
express permission of the National Biodiversity 
Authority before the patent application is filed.
National Biodiversity Authority approval ensures 
that the terms and conditions subject to which 
approval is granted secures equitable sharing 
of benefits arising out of the use of accessed 
biological resources, their byproducts, innovations 
and practices associated with their use and 
applications and knowledge relating thereto in 
accordance with MAT and conditions between 
the person applying for such approval, local 
bodies concerned and the benefit claimers.
Some have stated that PDRs may only operate well if provider 
countries have effective and efficient ABS regimes in place at 
the national level. In such cases, the practical application of a 
PDR may depend on the effectiveness of separate regulatory 
and compliance-tracking mechanisms, such as an interna-
tionally recognized certificate of compliance, including in a 
foreign jurisdiction. Furthermore, a lack of legal and institutional 
linkages and coordination with ABS authorities may limit the 
efficient and effective implementation of any new PDRs.
Box 25: Regional Strategy for Andean Countries
Decision 391 of 1996 established, inter alia, a 
tracking system for IP applications in Andean 
Countries. Decision 486 of 2000 (establishing the 
Common Industrial Property Regime) further 
developed certain compliance stipulations 
anticipated in the Complementary Provisions 
of Decision 391. In particular, according to 
Article 26 of Decision 486, applications to patent 
inventions including GRs and/or TK originating 
in countries of the Andean region should present 
the corresponding access contract or the 
respective license or authorization of use of TK.1

47
Capacity
The impact of a new PDR on the capacity needs and the 
mode of operation of patent offices could be minimal. For 
instance, this would be the case if a new PDR was framed 
as a simple transparency obligation of a procedural nature, 
namely, a requirement to furnish copies of any documents 
considered in good faith to be relevant to the claimed in -
vention. Such a procedural or formality requirement could 
be implemented without the need to undertake substantive 
checks of the content of such documents.
Box 26: German Law on new PDRs
German law requires disclosure of place of origin 
of biological material relating to plants or animals 
that are the subject matter of a patent application 
(Section 34a of the German Patent Act). However, 
this requirement is without prejudice to the 
examination of patent applications and the validity 
of rights arising from patents. The patent applicant 
is required only to complement an application 
with information on the geographical origin of a 
biological resource as requested by the Law. This 
requirement is a mere formality that does not 
add any burden on the work of the patent office.
Some patent or IP offices rely on decisions made by biodi-
versity-related authorities in order to certify the fulfillment 
of ABS conditions under a disclosure requirement and to 
allow the granting of patents.
Costa Rica: Article 80 of Biodiversity Law of 1998 
provides that:
The Technical Office of [the National Biodiversity 
Commission …] acts as the mandatory consultative 
body for all application procedures involving the 
protection of IP rights related to biodiversity and 
its decisions are binding for the IP office. Justified 
opposition from the Technical Office will prohibit 
registration of a patent or protection of the innovation.2
In fact, a properly designed institutional framework for ex-
changes and consultation between the patent office and 
biodiversity agencies may translate into increased support, 
coordination and collaboration in the application of PDRs. 
Examination capacity
Many developing countries’ patent offices do not have the full 
capacity to undertake a substantive examination of patent 
applications. Thus, these developing countries often opt for 
a simple patent registration with only formality examination 
of patent applications, utilization of substantive examination 
reports for the corresponding foreign patent application 
(containing the same invention) prepared by other patent 
offices, or join a system of regional or international cooper-
ation, such as the African Intellectual Property Organization 
(Organisation Africaine de la Propriété Intellectuelle, OAPI)3 
and ARIPO4 in Africa and the Eurasian Patent Organization5 
in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, where substantive 
patent examinations are conducted through a centralized 
mechanism.
The lack of adequate technical capacity and expertise in 
patent offices to effectively conduct a thorough examination 
of patent applications may raise critical questions about 
their potential ability to examine compliance with additional 
PDRs beyond a mere formality check. In countries with 
depository or registration systems, the patent office does 
not check patent applications to ensure that patentability 
criteria are met prior to the granting of patents. The validity 
of a granted patent, however, can be challenged before a 
competent court, and if the patentability criteria have not 
been met, the patent will be revoked.
Box 27: South African depository system
South Africa has a depository system for granting 
patents. The Registrar examines the patent 
application in the prescribed manner and if 
the application complies with the formality 
requirements of the Patent Act, a patent is granted.
A key shortcoming of the depository system 
is that some granted patents may fail to meet 
the patentability criteria. Compliance with the 
patentability criteria is only assessed by a court if 
the patents are challenged in litigation. On the one 
hand, the lack of a substantive examination system 
places a burden on the public to prove that a 
patented invention should not have been patented 
in the first place. 6 On the other, the registration 
system leads to cost saving, since establishing 
and maintaining a fully operational substantive 
patent examination unit in a patent office requires 
substantial human and financial resources.
Information technologies
Information technology systems are an important compo-
nent of an efficient IP administration. Efficient information 
technology systems are crucial not only for processing ap-
plications but also for the collection of important statistical 
and managerial information. Information technologies may 
aim to facilitate transmission of disclosed information for 
recording, evaluation and public notice purposes without 
generating undue administrative burdens and costs. Many 

48
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
countries still do not have patent status data in digital form 
and national online registries. This raises concerns that the 
legitimate right owners, including IPLCs, might not neces-
sarily be informed about relevant patent/IP applications 
and might therefore be unable to initiate opposition and/or 
revocation proceedings even when such remedies might 
potentially be available.
Box 28: Information technologies in South Africa
The National Recordal System was launched in 
South Africa by the Department of Science and 
Technology to document and digitize its rich 
source of the country’s GRs and TK. The System 
provides a variety of services including GR and 
TK hubs to government department and agencies 
and international patent offices. 7 It aims to 
mobilize, align and empower communities and 
related stakeholders countrywide and enable 
the discovery, cataloguing, capturing, validation 
and utilization of the national indigenous 
heritage in an appropriate framework. 8
Human and financial resources
The efficient implementation of a PDR demands not only 
an appropriate institutional framework that supports a 
country’s priorities and a coordinated mechanism of im -
proved management of IP but also an adequate number of 
properly trained staff. Developing countries, in particular, 
face shortages of professional staff in their national IP ad-
ministrations. The availability of technical and legal expertise 
in IP related to GRs and TK tends to be in short supply. 
Strengthening capacity-building to facilitate stakeholder 
consultations, providing legislative and policy guidance, 
organizing study visits, undertaking research and offering 
support for awareness raising and training could all help to 
advance a sustainable system.9
Apart from the development of extensive legal and scien -
tific expertise, implementation of PDRs involves a range of 
both one-time and recurrent costs. Countries, particularly 
developing ones, may find it difficult to maintain a balance 
between revenues and expenditures and generate sufficient 
revenues from IP fees to cover administrative costs. Likewise, 
it may not always be realistic to expect to recover the full 
costs of implementing PDRs through the fees charged to 
the users of the system.

49
17. Relationship with other instruments
Under the Nagoya Protocol, is there 
an obligation to provide for PDRs in 
order to monitor users’ compliance with 
domestic ABS requirements?
The simple answer to the above question is no. It is possible 
to do so, but there is no legal obligation under the Nagoya 
Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and 
Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to 
the Convention on Biological Diversity, 2010. The Nagoya 
Protocol implements and further specifies the ABS obliga-
tions of the CBD and also establishes additional obligations 
related to users’ compliance with domestic legislation or 
regulatory requirements on ABS (for GRs and associated 
TK) in countries other than the provider country. 1 It does 
so by creating, among other things, a globally harmonized 
certification mechanism for users’ compliance through an 
ABS Clearing-House,2 and by institutionalizing the so-called 
internationally recognized certificate of compliance.
What are the main implications of 
establishing the patent/IP office as 
a designated checkpoint under the 
Nagoya Protocol?
The Nagoya Protocol requires all contracting parties to es-
tablish one or more checkpoints. These may include, among 
others, IP and/or patent offices. In particular: “checkpoints 
would collect or receive, as appropriate, relevant informa-
tion related to [prior informed consent], to the source of the 
genetic resource, to the establishment of [mutually agreed 
terms], and/or to the utilization of genetic resources. […] 
Such information, including from internationally recognized 
certificates of compliance where they are available, will, 
without prejudice to the protection of confidential infor -
mation, be provided to relevant national authorities, to the 
Party providing [prior informed consent] and to the [ABS] 
Clearing-House, as appropriate.”3 These provisions aim to 
promote increased transparency about the utilization of 
GRs in user countries as part of their compliance measures.
Under Article 13 of the Nagoya Protocol, each Party is also 
required to designate a national focal point on ABS and one 
or more competent national authorities (CNAs), which are 
responsible for, among other things, granting access to GRs. 
Parties may designate a single entity to fulfil the functions 
of both focal point and CNA. However, the CNA is usually 
separate from a country’s checkpoint or checkpoints.
While historically patent/IP offices have been seen as an 
almost “natural” checkpoint by developing countries, 4 the 
Nagoya Protocol includes neither an indicative list of check-
points5 nor any reference to new PDRs. Instead, it provides 
that checkpoints must be effective and should have functions 
relevant to the utilization of GRs or the collection of relevant 
information at, inter alia, any stage of research, development, 
innovation, pre-commercialization or commercialization. An 
IP/patent office may therefore be designated as a checkpoint 
to assist the CNA in discharging its duties. As with any other 
designated checkpoint, the patent/IP office will then sup -
port the identification of potential cases of non-compliance 
by collecting or receiving, and subsequently transmitting, 
relevant information to the CNA, to the country providing 
PIC and to the ABS Clearing-House of the Nagoya Protocol.
In sum, the Nagoya Protocol leaves it up to each contracting 
party to decide whether it may wish to use PDRs as a mecha-
nism to monitor the utilization of GRs (and associated TK) within 
its jurisdiction.6 Thus, contracting parties may freely choose to 
provide for voluntary PDRs, mandatory PDRs or no PDRs at 
all. A country that does decide to provide for a new PDR is free 
to use such mechanism as a checkpoint in order to monitor 
users’ compliance in accordance with the Nagoya Protocol 
– but equally could instead choose to establish other relevant 
checkpoints, as appropriate, to fit its national circumstances.
What is the possible relationship 
between a new PDR and ABS 
obligations under the FAO ITPGRFA?
The Nagoya Protocol requires the development and imple-
mentation of ABS regulatory frameworks at the national 
level. However, legislative, administrative or policy mea -
sures taken in this regard need to be consistent with and 
mutually supportive of other international ABS instruments 
such as the FAO ITPGRFA.7 In particular, the latter estab -
lishes a Multilateral System of ABS for the most important 
food crops and forages, which are listed in its Annex I. 
The Multilateral System includes all Annex I plant genetic 
resources for food and agriculture (PGRFA) which are under 
the management and control of contracting parties and in 
the public domain. In particular, it provides for their facilitat-
ed access in accordance with standard conditions of ABS 
under the Standard Material Transfer Agreement (SMTA),8 
and implements benefit-sharing through the mechanisms of 
information exchange, access to and transfer of technology, 
capacity building and the sharing of the benefits arising from 
commercialization. Proposals have been made that if PDRs 
are applicable to PGRFA transferred under the terms and 
conditions of the Multilateral System, the PDRs may require 
the source of the PGRFA to be indicated as the Multilateral 
System of the ITPGRFA.

50
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Box 29: The Nagoya Protocol, 2010
The Nagoya Protocol proposes an international 
framework to ensure that the benefits arising from 
the use of GRs (i.e., “the conduct of research and 
development on the genetic and/or biochemical 
composition of genetic resources”) and associated 
TK are shared with the countries that may 
legitimately provide such resources (i.e., countries 
of origin or other countries that have legally 
acquired GRs).9 Such sharing of benefits shall be 
based on PIC and MAT. With a view to linking the 
three objectives of the Convention, the Protocol 
encourages parties to use the income generated 
by this mechanism to fund activities aimed at the 
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity.10 
The Nagoya Protocol reaffirms that GRs are subject 
to national sovereignty11 and offers the opportunity 
to recognize the rights of indigenous and local 
communities over their GRs12 and associated TK.13 
The Nagoya Protocol thus responds not only to 
the concerns of the countries of origin of GRs, but 
also to those of the user countries, in that it aims 
to establish a clear and transparent framework for 
access to GRs.14 The main content of the Protocol 
comprises four interrelated pillars: access to 
GRs, benefit-sharing, TK and compliance.
Source: Claudio Chiarolla, “Genetic resources” in Elisa Morgera 
and Kati Kulovesi (eds.) Research Handbook on International 
Law and Natural Resources (Edward Elgar, 2016).
Box 30: Nagoya Protocol Article 17 – Monitoring the 
Utilization of GRs
“1. To support compliance, each Party shall take 
measures, as appropriate, to monitor and to 
enhance transparency about the utilization of 
genetic resources. Such measures shall include […] 
the designation of one or more checkpoints […].
“2. A permit or its equivalent […] made available to 
the ABS Clearing-House, shall constitute an inter -
nationally recognized certificate of compliance.
“3. An internationally recognized certificate of 
compliance shall serve as evidence that the genetic 
resource which it covers has been accessed in 
accordance with prior informed consent and that 
mutually agreed terms have been established, 
as required by the domestic access and benefit-
sharing legislation or regulatory requirements 
of the Party providing prior informed consent.
“4. The internationally recognized certificate of 
compliance shall contain the following minimum 
information when it is not confidential:
a. Issuing authority;
b. Date of issuance;
c. The provider;
d. Unique identifier of the certificate;
e. The person or entity to whom prior 
informed consent was granted;
f. Subject-matter or genetic resources 
covered by the certificate;
g. Confirmation that mutually agreed 
terms were established;
h. Confirmation that prior informed 
consent was obtained; and
i. Commercial and/or non-commercial use.”
In addition to the 64 crops and forages that are listed in 
Annex I, non-Annex I PGRFA may also be voluntarily ex -
changed under the SMTA, and this is a standard institutional 
practice for materials held by the ex situ collections of the 
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research. 
However, the conditions of facilitated access under the 
SMTA apply only if the purpose of such access is the uti -
lization and conservation of such resources for research, 
breeding and training for food and agriculture; they do not 
apply for chemical, pharmaceutical and/or other non-food/
feed industrial uses.
According to the ITPGRFA, when certain conditions are 
met, those who commercialize a product developed from 
a PGRFA obtained from the Multilateral System must pay 
“an equitable share of the benefits arising from the com -
mercialization of that product” into a benefit-sharing fund.15 
The SMTA also prevents the recipients of such resources 
from claiming IP rights over those resources in the form in 
which they received them.
While neither the ITPGRFA nor the SMTA impose a patent 
disclosure obligation as such on the recipients of PGRFA, a 
contractual annual reporting obligation that covers, among 
other things, patent-related restrictions on access to such 
resources has been established.

51
Relationship with other instruments
Box 31: The SMTA reporting obligations
SMTA Annex 2, Article 3 (c) states:
“The Recipient shall submit to the Governing 
Body, within sixty (60) days after each calendar 
year ending December 31st, an annual report 
setting forth […] information that allows for 
the identification of any restrictions that have 
given rise to the benefit-sharing payment.”
In addition to the above reporting obligations, countries 
are free to choose whether or not to subject any PGRFA- 
related inventions to a specific disclosure requirement 
under patent law. 
The ITPGRFA is one sectorially specific, specialized ABS 
agreement, which is recognized in the Nagoya Protocol. 
The Preamble of the Protocol explicitly “recall[s that] the 
Multilateral System of Access and Benefit-sharing [was] 
established under the International Treaty on Plant Genetic 
Resources for Food and Agriculture developed in harmo -
ny with the Convention”. Article 4 of the Nagoya Protocol 
furthermore provides that in general the Protocol “shall be 
implemented in a mutually supportive manner with other 
international instruments relevant to this Protocol. Due re-
gard should be paid to useful and relevant ongoing work or 
practices under such international instruments and relevant 
international organizations”.16 
One further such instrument, which was adopted in 2011, 
is the PIP Framework of the World Health Organization. 
SMTAs regulate the transfer of biological material 17 under 
the framework and questions of ABS, including IP related 
questions.18 Also, possible future specialized instruments, 
which are currently under negotiation, such as a possible 
instrument on the convservation and sustainable use of ma-
rine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction 
under the United Convention on the Law of the Seas, may 
have a future bearing on PDRs but are not addressed in the 
current version of this publication.19 

52
18. Other measures
Are there alternative and/or complementary 
measures or mechanisms that can be used 
to promote PDR-related objectives?
Due diligence approach
In the field of IP, due diligence refers to extensive research 
into and examination of the ownership, status and control 
of IP assets, the strength and economic value of those as-
sets (for instance, in the context of an acquisition), and the 
potential liability for infringement when undertaking R&D. 
Regarding the implementation of compliance-related ABS 
obligations, the due diligence approach was established 
in 2014 as the cornerstone of the EU Regulation on user 
compliance with ABS. The Regulation provides a broad 
scope for due diligence, which apply to all users of GRs 
falling within the scope of the Regulation – independent of 
their size or the intended use (i.e., commercial or non-com-
mercial) – including individuals, researchers, small and 
medium-sized enterprises and multinational companies. 
Users must exercise due diligence to ascertain that any 
GRs and associated TK they utilize comply with applicable 
ABS rules in the provider country.
EU: Regulation No. 511/2014 on compliance mea-
sures for users from the Nagoya Protocol on Access 
to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable 
Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization in 
the Union, 16 April 2014 adopts a “due diligence” 
approach consisting of three elements: informa -
tion gathering, risk assessment and risk mitigation: 
“Article 4 – Obligations of users
“1. Users shall exercise due diligence to ascertain that 
genetic resources and traditional knowledge associ-
ated with genetic resources which they utilise have 
been accessed in accordance with applicable access 
and benefit-sharing legislation or regulatory require-
ments, and that benefits are fairly and equitably shared 
upon mutually agreed terms, in accordance with any 
applicable legislation or regulatory requirements. 
“6. Users shall keep the information relevant to ac-
cess and benefit-sharing for 20 years after the end 
of the period of utilization.”
In the EU context,1 a mere declaration that due diligence 
was duly undertaken (instead of actual disclosure of the 
source or PIC and MAT) is sufficient to fulfill user-related 
obligations at the compliance checkpoints established under 
the Regulation. In Switzerland, by contrast, due diligence 
obligations complement the required declaration of source 
in patent applications.
Figure 2: The relationship between declaration of 
source under the Swiss Federal Act on Patents for 
Inventions and the due diligence and notification 
requirements of the Swiss Federal Act on the 
Protection of Nature and Cultural Heritage
The Swiss Federal Institute of Intellectual 
Property is a checkpoint to enhance 
transparency within the patent system, while 
the Federal Office for the Environment is the 
centralized checkpoint for implementation 
of the Nagoya Protocol. The due diligence 
requirement means that relevant information
to be disclosed at the checkpoints will be readily 
available along the innovation and value chain 
of a GR and/or TK associated with GRs.
Source: WIPO/GRTKF/IC/31/8, Annex, p.103.
Disclosure of the source as a contractual 
obligation
The legal basis for an obligation to disclose information 
about the source of GRs or TK could be provided by the 
contract or agreement establishing the terms of access, in 
line with Nagoya Protocol Article 17.1(b). In such cases, a 
disclosure-like requirement and other reporting requirements 
could be enforced as contractual obligations.2 Thus, specific 
clauses in an ABS agreement can be utilized to support 
monitoring and tracking the use and commercialization of 
GRs and TK. For example, contracts may include a require-
ment to expressly disclose the existence of a benefit-sharing 
agreement and to indicate the source of biological materials 
or TK in a related patent application. A possible shortfall of 
contractual disclosure obligations is that they may not be 
relied on against third parties.3
Value chain of the utilization of GRs and TK associated with GRs
Disclosure 
Checkpoint IPI: 
declaration of source 
in patent applications
Federal Act on 
Patents for 
Inventions
Noti/f_ication
Checkpoint FOEN: 
noti/f_ication of compliance 
with due diligence before 
market authorization or 
commercialization
Federal Act on the 
Protection of Nature 
and Cultural Heritage
Due diligence
For all users, whether 
for commercial or 
non-commercial 
purposes
Federal Act on the 
Protection of Nature 
and Cultural 
Heritage

53
Other measures
Databases and information systems
The development of information tools and databases in the 
field of GRs and associated TK can be a valuable mechanism 
to address the problem of erroneously granted patents. 
Databases can increase the likelihood that relevant information 
about GRs and TK is available to patent-granting authorities 
for the substantive examination of patent applications, and 
that this information can be located and accessed during 
the patenting process. Databases may compile and refer-
ence a wide range of information and reference materials, 
including, for example, GRs, associated TK, derivatives, 
known uses of GRs and relevant scientific articles. Their 
status may be formal or informal and they may be held 
and compiled by States, research institutions or IPLCs.
Box 32: Traditional Knowledge Digital Library 
(TKDL), India
The TKDL is an easily accessible non-patent 
literature database on India’s TKas well as 
knowledge on plant use by practitioners of 
classical medical knowledge systems commonly 
known by and/or provided to the population of 
India, neighboring countries, and to the South 
Asian diaspora.4 It contributes to overcoming 
language barriers and to bridging the gap in 
information about TK in major patent offices. 
The TKDL contains 34 million pages of formatted 
information on 2,260,000 medical formulations 
selected from various classical texts of Indian 
systems of medicine, namely, Ayurveda, Unani, 
Yoga and Siddha.5 It is modeled on the WIPO 
International Patent Classification and designed 
to assist patent examiners of major IP/patent 
offices, including the USPTO, the EPO and the 
Japanese Patent Office, in their prior art searches. 
Access to the TKDL requires individual IP/Patent 
offices to sign a TKDL (Non-disclosure) Access 
Agreement. The IP/patent office may not disclose 
information about TKDL content to third parties 
unless such specific information is necessary for 
the purposes of the patent grant procedure.
According to the Government of India, the 
TKDL has been useful in challenging the grant 
of erroneous patents.6 Reportedly, 1,400 pre-
grant patent oppositions have been filed using 
the TKDL, and 222 patents have been revoked.7 
However, independent sources have been more 
skeptical as to how far the TKDL may really have 
helped in challenging erroneous patents.8
Key issues that need to be considered with respect to the 
development of such databases include, in particular:
• responsibility for compiling and maintaining the database; 
• the cost of establishing, operating and updating the 
database;
• the structure and content of the database;
• the form in which that content would be expressed;
• its interoperability with other databases both nationally 
and internationally;
• the category of persons or institutions authorized to 
access the content of the database;
• the type and level of protection afforded to the information 
included in the database;
• management of rights pertaining to the database; and
• that safeguards have been put in place in order to ensure 
that the inclusion of TK-related information in the database 
is subject to free prior informed consent from the relevant 
knowledge holders/custodians.
Some concerns have been raised as to whether databases 
are appropriate mechanisms for the protection of GRs and 
TK.9 For instance, some countries and indigenous repre -
sentatives have questioned whether they might further 
facilitate the dissemination of information contained in the 
database, thereby potentially contributing to its misappro-
priation. Without proper security measures in place, the use 
of databases may also raise security issues regarding who 
can access the content and the information that is made 
publicly available.
Subject matter eligibility
Patent examination starts by determining whether a claim is 
eligible for patenting and falls into one or more categories 
listed under patent-eligible subject matter. The term subject 
matter eligibility denotes limitations on the categories of 
subject matter that may be considered for patent protec -
tion. This inquiry is different from and always precedes the 
question whether the subject matter meets the patentability 
criteria of novelty, industrial application and inventive step.
Article 27.1 of the TRIPS Agreement establishes minimal 
criteria for patentability, but leaves countries flexibility to 
define the threshold level for patent-eligible inventions. WTO 
Members have full discretion to determine what should be 
deemed an invention and may take advantage of TRIPS-
enumerated exclusions on diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical 
methods for the treatment of humans or animals; plants 
and animals other than micro-organisms; and essentially 
biological processes for the production of plants or animals 
other than non-biological and microbiological processes.

54
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Box 33: The WTO TRIPS Agreement 
“Article 27 – Patentable Subject Matter
“Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 
3 [on exclusions from patentability], patents 
shall be available for any inventions, whether
products or processes, in all fields of technology, 
provided that they are new, involve an inventive 
step and are capable of industrial application.”
Some countries exclude the mere extraction or isolation of 
a naturally existing substance from patent-eligible subject 
matter. GRs and (their derivatives) as found in nature or 
isolated therefrom may not be considered as patent-eligible 
subject matter and can be excluded from patent protection.
Box 34: Indian Patent Act, 1970
Article 3(c) states:
“[…] The following are not inventions within the 
meaning of this Act: [...] the discovery of any living 
thing or non-living substance occurring in nature.”
Thus, the extraction and isolation of biological 
materials is generally considered to be the mere 
discovery of a naturally occurring substance, and 
is not patent-eligible subject matter in India.
For countries rich in biodiversity, especially if they have little 
capacity to examine complex biotechnology patents, the 
provision of exclusions from patent subject matter eligibility 
could provide a TRIPS-compliant alternative for addressing 
misappropriation concerns nationally.
Figure 3: ARIPO TK database
ARIPO is considering whether to develop a TK database through national authorities. A “tiered approach” 
has been proposed to address some concerns such as confidentiality and public domain issues. 10
Source: Emmanuel Sackey (ARIPO), presentation delivered at the WIPO Seminar on IP and GRs on May 27, 2016, Roundtable 4: Databases and Other 
Defensive Measures relating to GRs and Associated TK, www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/tk/en/wipo_iptk_ge_16/wipo_iptk_ge_16_presentation_15sackey.pdf
ARIPO’s differentiated (tiered) approach 
to database construction

Publicly available 
TKaGR
TKaGR-based patent 
applications and grants
Undisclosed TKaGR – 
con/f_idential database 
(database trust)
Third-party access
(users)
TKaGR database 
(tiered approach)
National IP 
information 
sources
IPLC knowledge
Member 
States 
module
ARIPO
Member States
Open access
PIC, MAT

55
19. PDRs – a checklist for policymakers
Deciding whether to create new PDRs related to GRs and TK, and, if so, how to implement them, is not straightforward. 
It depends on a broad range of factors, including policy goals and objectives, competing interests, legal nature of the 
requirements, institutional framework and capacities, among others.
As this study has explained, there are many options to consider – different forms of law in which a new PDR might be 
included, important differences in terms of the possible scope and content of obligations, the consequences of breaching 
those obligations, the mechanisms and institutions that might enforce them, and so on. Each of these options may entail 
different opportunities, risks and costs that will vary depending on the national context in which a PDR is implemented.
By identifying the key options in a systematic way, drawing on the experience of implementing PDRs in various countries, 
this study aims to enable policymakers to reach informed decisions and facilitate understanding, implementation and 
training on these issues at the national and regional levels, as appropriate. It is each country’s prerogative to make its 
own decisions and address the challenges presented by the possible creation and implementation of new PDRs, if it 
wishes to do so, while providing a careful balance of the various interests at stake.
The following checklist may provide useful information to policymakers.

56
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
1
Assess the need, if any, for new 
PDRs related to GRs and TK. What 
objectives would they meet?
Consider the potential risks and 
opportunities of implementing 
different PDR options in the context 
of national innovation systems.
Consider any alternative or 
complementary tools and measures 
(such as other monitoring 
mechanisms to promote compliance 
with domestic legislative, 
administrative or policy measures 
on ABS, and the creation of GR and/
or TK databases).
Pay attention to the changing 
and diverse R&D landscape to 
better determine where and how 
connections between IP and ABS 
systems may occur, and drive policy 
changes accordingly.
2
 Identify key stakeholders from 
different government agencies, 
organizations, IPLCs, the research 
sector and industry that deals with 
IP, ABS, R&D, bioprospecting, bio-
trade and biodiversity issues.
Create a fair and transparent 
engagement process for all 
stakeholders to bring credible 
expertise, and integrate and balance 
various domestic priorities.
 Decide which of the available patent 
disclosure options and flexibilities 
may be appropriate for your national 
circumstances, if any.
3
Assess the required implementation 
capacities and costs.
Consider how to initiate and sustain 
legal and institutional linkages and 
coordination among ABS authorities 
and IP/patent offices, as appropriate.
4
Develop a plan to implement any 
new PDR in a mutually supportive 
manner together with policies and 
practices that provide a balanced 
and flexible innovation governance 
structure, taking into account 
differences between uses of GRs 
and TK for pure or upstream non-
commercial R&D of commercial 
products.
5
Implement a well-structured and 
efficient information technology 
system for processing applications 
and the collection of important 
statistical and managerial 
information related to new PDRs.
6
Consider whether to provide 
opportunities for natural or legal 
persons (ABS authorities, IPLCs 
and other relevant stakeholders) 
to oppose a patent application by 
submitting information and analysis 
concerning the alleged violation of a 
PDR to patent examiners, under an 
adversarial administrative process 
(i.e., pre-grant opposition), or if any 
other remedies should be available 
once the patent has been granted 
(i.e., post-grant opposition).
7
Consider how to monitor progress 
and ensure compliance and 
continuous improvement of the 
system in light of its set objectives.
Review implementation of 
new PDRs on a regular basis to 
determine if they are effective or if 
they undermine other competing 
goals and benefits, and make 
modifications as necessary.
8
Invest in capacity building and 
training, raising awareness among 
stakeholders and facilitating 
consultations on IP, GRs and TK, as 
appropriate.
9
Take advantage of WIPO’s capacity-
building activities and resources 
to strengthen national capacities, 
organize study visits and receive 
legislative and policy advice, as 
needed.
The Traditional Knowledge Division 
of the WIPO Secretariat can be 
contacted at: grtkf@wipo.int

57
1. Introduction
1. See, for instance, Stephanie Heyl (November 27, 2014) 
“Bioanalysis – techniques for the characterization 
of biological material”, https://www.analytic-news.
com/papers/pdf/bioproe2.pdf 
2. While the primary focus of this study is on dis -
closure requirements within the patent system, in 
several countries, relevant disclosure requirements 
may also apply to other IP rights (see section 8). In 
addition, such requirements may also be introduced 
via biodiversity legislation (see section 7). Therefore, 
at some points in this study references may be made 
in general terms to disclosure requirements in the 
context of the patent and/or IP system, as well as to 
the patent/IP office as the competent authority, as 
applicable, and subject to national legislation.
3. Semi-structured informal interviews were conduct-
ed with selected Member States as a preliminary step 
in the research process in order to develop a better 
understanding of their national experiences. They 
provided useful insights into the implementation of 
patent disclosure requirements in various national 
settings, the challenges faced, key lessons learned and 
best practices. Data was collected through interviews 
with patent/IP office representatives in eight countries 
on a non-attributable basis. This allowed the inter -
viewees to share their knowledge and experiences. 
The interview data provided background information 
on country-specific issues including legal aspects of 
disclosure requirements and their implementation, 
and also provided insights into the interpretation of 
data contained in the current literature.
4. The Nagoya Protocol was adopted on October 29, 
2010 and entered into force on October 12, 2014. For 
more information, see pp.50-51.
5. This study draws on the following resources:
• The WIPO Technical Study on Patent 
Disclosure Requirements related to Genetic 
Resources and Traditional Knowledge 
(2004), which provides detailed technical 
explanations regarding specific disclosure 
requirements and their implementation;
• The Disclosure Requirements Table (see the 
Annex), which presents a compilation of 
extracts from national and regional legislative 
texts that provide for specific disclosure 
requirements related to genetic resources 
and/or associated traditional knowledge;
• The Draft Examination of Issues regarding 
the Interrelation of Access to Genetic 
Resources and Disclosure Requirements 
in IPR Applications, contained in the 
Annex to Document WO/GA/32/8;
• The WIPO Database of Traditional Knowledge, 
Traditional Cultural Expressions & Genetic 
Resources Laws, which provides access 
to laws, treaties and regulations on the 
protection of the above subjects ( www.
wipo.int/tk/en/databases/tklaws ).
The immediate context for the 2004 WIPO Technical 
Study referred to above was a request of the Conference 
of the Parties (COP) to the UN Convention on Biological 
Diversity at its sixth meeting in The Hague from April 
7 to 19, 2002 (Decision VI/24C). The preparation of 
the WIPO Technical Study was based on responses 
to a questionnaire circulated to the Member States of 
WIPO. The WIPO Technical Study was made available 
to the seventh meeting of the COP in Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia, from February 9 to 20, 2004, as document 
UNEP/CBD/COP/7/INF/17. The COP noted “with 
appreciation the Technical Study on Disclosure 
Requirements Concerning Genetic Resources and 
Traditional Knowledge prepared by [WIPO]… and 
consider[ed] the contents of the Technical Study 
to be helpful in the consideration of intellectual 
property-related aspects of user measures” (Decision 
VII/19E, Preamble).
The Twenty-Ninth Session of the IGC, which took 
place from February 15 to 19, 2016, endorsed the 
ongoing progress on updating and improving the 
WIPO Technical Study. See the Decisions of the 
Twenty-Ninth Session of the IGC under Agenda Item 
7 (WIPO/GRTKF/IC/29/8), p.119.
2. Background and concept
1. Robert P. Merges and Richard R. Nelson, “On the 
complex economics of patent scope”, 90 Colum. L. 
Rev. 839, 908 (1990).
2. Andrew Pollack, “Patenting life: a special report; 
‘Biological products raise genetic ownership issues’”, 
New York Times , November 26, 1999.
3. Gordon Gerard Birch, Ingredients Handbook – 
Sweeteners . (Ingredients Handbook Series) 
Leatherhead Food Research Association, Leatherhead, 
United Kingdom, 2000.
4. U.S. patent 5326580, Hellekant BG, Ming D,“Brazzein 
sweetener”, issued 1994-07-05.
5. “Pentadiplandra Brazzeana”, World Heritage 
Encyclopedia, http://worldheritage.org/Find/
Pentadiplandra%20brazzeana 
6. John Madeley, “Hungry for trade: how the poor 
pay for free trade”, Political Science , 2000, pp.101-103.
7. House of Commons, Select Committee on 
Environmental Audit Appendices to the Minutes of 
Evidence, November 1999, www.publications.parlia -
ment.uk/pa/cm199900/cmselect/cmenvaud/45/4502.
htm#evidence 
8. Pádraig Carmody, The New Scramble for Africa , 
Polity Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2011, p.1970.
9. Scheherazade Daneshkhu, “Health drive whets 
drink industry’s thirst for sugar alternative”, Financial 
Times , April 5, 2015.
10. Elaine Watson, “Brazzein entrepreneur seeks 
partner to take next-generation natural sweetener to 
market”, Food Navigator, February 2014, www.foodnav-
igator-usa.com/Suppliers2/Brazzein-entrepreneur-
seeks-partner-to-take-next-generation-natural-
sweetener-to-market 
11. See Nagoya Protocol Articles 6.2 and 7, and Decision 
CBD/NP/MOP/DEC/2/7 of 10 December 2016 on 
the use of the term “indigenous peoples and local 
communities”.
12. Novelty is a fundamental requirement in any 
examination as to substance and is an undisputed 
condition of patentability. It must be emphasized, 
however, that novelty is not something which can be 
proved or established; only its absence can be proved. 
An invention is new if it is not anticipated by the prior 
art. “Prior art” is, in general, all the knowledge that 
existed prior to the relevant filing or priority date 
of a patent application, whether it existed by way of 
written or oral disclosure. (WIPO Intellectual Property 
Handbook, 2008).
13. In relation to the requirement of inventive step (also 
referred to as “non-obviousness”), the question as to 
whether or not the invention “would have been obvious 
to a person having ordinary skill in the art” is perhaps 
the most difficult of the standards to determine in 
the examination as to substance. The inclusion of a 
requirement like this in patent legislation is based 
on the premise that protection should not be given 
to what is already known as part of the prior art, or 
to anything that the person with ordinary skill could 
deduce as an obvious consequence thereof. ( WIPO 
Intellectual Property Handbook , 2008).
14. An invention, in order to be patentable, must be of 
a kind which can be applied for practical purposes, 
not be purely theoretical. If the invention is intended 
to be a product or part of a product, it should be 
possible to make that product. And if the invention 
is intended to be a process or part of a process, it 
should be possible to carry that process out or “use” 
it (the general term) in practice. ( WIPO Intellectual 
Property Handbook , 2008).
15. On conventional disclosure under patent law, see 
WIPO Technical Study , p.2.
16. That being so, there is a need to raise awareness of, 
and promote respect for, applicable legal requirements, 
regarding the use of GRs and associated TK. This need 
is accentuated when R&D occurs in the context of 
transnational research projects or larger consortia, 
where researcher partners in other jurisdictions could 
also access research materials and results, and could 
take important decisions regarding the protection of 
the resulting IP. It is therefore important to consult 
national IP and other applicable laws in respect of 
disclosure of GRs and TK, benefit-sharing and prior 
informed consent from relevant TK/GRs owners 
and holders. Universities should undertake sound 
due diligence in relation to the initial collection, 
use and possible transfer of GRs and associated TK. 
Due diligence also helps universities ensure future 
investment in the development of their IP assets. 
Although non-compliance with ABS-related due 
diligence may not necessarily impair fundamental 
research in the labs, it can certainly become an ob -
stacle when universities attempt to commercialize 
their research assets (through licensing or otherwise). 
This is because compliance check-points under 
the Nagoya Protocol may target the final products, 
when they are placed on the market. It is therefore of 
great importance for universities to be able to show 
to commercial partners that they have actually un -
dertaken upstream due diligence. See IP Policies for 
Universities and Research Institutions, www.wipo.
int/policy/en/university_ip_policies
17. See, for instance, Article 49a(2) of the revised Swiss 
Patent Act. Introduit par le ch. I de la LF du 22 juin 
2007, en vigueur depuis le 1er juil. 2008 (RO 2008 2551; 
FF 2006 1). « Si la source n’est connue ni de l’inventeur 
ni du requérant, ce dernier doit le confirmer par 
écrit. » https://www.ipi.ch/en/legal-info/legal-areas/
intellectual-property-and-sustainable-development/
disclosure-of-source.html 
For countries which have adopted similar provisions, 
an additional PDR need not create an undue burden 
on the applicant.
18. See section 16 on capacity.
19. See the Disclosure Requirements Table annexed 
to this study.
20. See also section 4 on complementary and com -
peting interests and objectives.
21. Queen Mary Intellectual Property Research 
Institute, Report on Disclosure of Origin in Patent 
Applications, European Commision, 2004 (hereinafter 
QMUL report), p.21.
3. Objectives
1. Shakeel Bhatti, Tomme Young, Santiago Carrizosa, 
and Patrick McGuire, Contracting for ABS: The Legal 
and Scientific Implications of Bioprospecting Contracts, 
2009, p.12.
2. “Megadiverse countries” is a term used to refer to 
the world’s top biodiversity-rich countries. See www.
biodiversitya-z.org/content/megadiverse -countries
3. See for example, WTO, “The TRIPS Agreement and 
Convention on Biological Diversity”, IP/C/W/368/
Rev.1, revised 8 February 2006, pp.28-31.
4. Indian patent law did not permit product patents at 
that point. India started to grant patents for pharma-
ceutical products in 2005. The Patents (Amendment) 
Act, 2005 No. 15 of 2005, http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/
en/text.jsp?file_id=128116
Endnotes

58
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
5. 2319/DEL/2008, Application Awaiting Examination. 
6. The Patents (Amendment) Act, 2002, ACT NO. 38 OF 
2002 [ 25th June, 2002.], S 10(4)(d)(ii).
7. 2391/DEL/2008.
8. WIPO, “Using traditional knowledge to revive the body 
and a community”, IP Advantage Case Study, ht t p ://
www.wipo.int/ipadvantage/en/details.jsp?id=2599
9. The concept of laying open for public inspection 
is the source of the Latin verb “patere” from which 
the English word “patent” is derived.
10. See, for instance, WIPO Patent Register Portal, 
www.wipo.int/branddb/portal/portal.jsp
11. The Nagoya Protocol is a supplementary agreement 
to the CBD. It sets out the rules and mechanisms for 
ABS and provides a legal framework for the effective 
implementation of the fair and equitable sharing of 
benefits arising out of the utilization of GRs. See Box 29.
12. Jorge Cabrera Medaglia, Overview of National and 
Regional Measures on Access to Genetic Resources 
and Benefit-Sharing: Challenges and Opportunities 
in Implementing the Nagoya Protocol, 2014, CISDL 
Biodiversity & Biosafety Law Research Program, p.46, 
http://www.absfocalpoint.nl/upload_mm/5/f/4/008c-
9cc8-19f3-4926-b380-5f13fd1eb705_Overview%20
of%20national%20and%20regional%20measures%20
on%20access%20and%20benefit%20sharing.pdf
13. Several access permits have been issued under 
Decree 25. Jorge Cabrera Medaglia, The Disclosure 
of Origin Requirement in Central America, (ICTSD 
Programme on Natural Resources, International 
Trade and Sustainable Development, Issue Paper 
No.3.), International Centre for Trade and Sustainable 
Development, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland, p.12.
14. Medaglia, supra note 12, p.47.
15. However, there is usually a race to file patents since 
all patent offices now follow a first-to-file system. PIC 
and MAT requirements combined with PDRs could 
delay patent applications. Patent applicants would 
weigh the risk of incurring sanctions for the violation 
of a PDR requirement against the risk of losing the 
right to the patent altogether.
4. Complementary and competing 
interests and objectives
1. The “defensive” protection of GRs/TK reduces the 
chance that patents are granted, that incorrectly and/
or illegally claim inventions using GRs/TK.
2. See section 18, p.54 on databases and information 
systems. 
3. Manisha Desai, Eli Lilly and Company, USA, 
“Roundtable 2: Policy Objectives relating to Intellectual 
Property and Genetic Resources”, Seminar on 
Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, May 
26-27, 2016, WIPO/IPTK/GE/16/INF/1, http:/ /www.
wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/tk/en/wipo_iptk_ge_16/
wipo_iptk_ge_16_presentation_7desai.pdf
4. See statements from Japan, the Republic of Korea and 
the United States of America, WIPO/GRTKF/IC/29/8, 
p. 11, 54, 94. For instance, it has been argued that “if 
an applicant is required to perform due diligence 
and provide information on source of origin of a GR 
to a patent office, that would take some time and it 
would also take some legal expense”. Dominic Keating, 
Director of IP Attaché Program from the United 
States Patent and Trademark Office, “Roundtable 2: 
Policy Objectives relating to Intellectual Property and 
Genetic Resources”, Seminar on Intellectual Property 
and Genetic Resources, May 26-27, 2016, WIPO/IPTK/
GE/16. Keating also refers to a study which found that, 
in general, “delays in the patent examination process 
significantly reduce firm growth, job creation, and 
innovation, even when a firm’s patent application is 
eventually approved”. See Joan Farre-Mensa, Deepak 
Hegde and Alexander Ljungqvist, “The Bright Side of 
Patents,” Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 
16-071, December 2015. See also section 16 on capacity.
5. An “unreasonable delay” is usually defined as 
more than five years from the date of filing or three 
years after an examination request in U.S. free trade 
agreements. 
6. See Term Extensions or Adjustments for Delays Within 
the USPTO Under 35 U.S.C. 154 [R-07.2015] ht t p s ://
www.uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/mpep/s2710.html 
7. Section 53 bis1, Law No. 19.039 on Industrial Property 
(Consolidated Text of January 26, 2007, approved by 
Decree-Law No. 3).
8. Section 36A, Singapore Patents Act (Revised Edition 
2005, as amended up to the Statutes (Miscellaneous 
Amendments) Act 2014).
9. Article 89, Republic of Korea Patent Act (Act No. 950 
of December 31, 1961, as amended up to Act No. 6411 
of February 3, 2001).
10. Edson Beas Rodrigues Jr.,“Property rights, biocul -
tural resources and two tragedies: some lessons from 
Brazil” in Tania Bubela and E. Richard Gold (eds.), 
Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge: Case 
Studies and Conflicting Interests, 2012, pp.149-150 
11. For more information, see Nagoya Protocol Articles 
8(a) and 6.3(iii), and ABS-Management Tool. Best 
Practice Standard and Handbook for Implementing 
Genetic Resource Access and Benefit-sharing 
Activities, Swiss State Secretariat for Economic 
Affairs (SECO), 2012, p. I-30, 31, www.sib.admin.ch/
fileadmin/chm-dateien/ABS-Protokoll/ABS_MT/
Updated_ABS_Management_Tool_May_2012.pdf 
12. R. Barbieri, J. Gomes, A. Alercia and S. Padulosi, 
“Agricultural biodiversity in Southern Brazil: integrat-
ing efforts for conservation and use of neglected and 
underutilized species”, Sustainability 2014, 6, pp.741-757.
13. See John Vogler and Alan M. Russell, The 
International Politics of Biotechnology: Investigating 
Global Futures, Manchester University Press, 2000, p.91.
14. Brazilian Provisional Act 2.816-16/2001, Art. 31. 
15. See id. and The Biotechnology Industry 
Organization (BIO), Proposal for Reform of Brazil’s 
Bioprospecting and Genetic Resources Regulations (18 
November 2013), https://www.bio.org/sites/default/
files/BIO%20Brazil%20Bioprospecting%20&%20
Genetic%20Resources%20FINAL.pdf 
16. Luiz Antonio Barreto de Castro, “The future of sus-
tainable use biodiversity in Brazil”, Bioentrepreneur 
– Trade Secrets, 24 March 2015.
17. According to the Minister of Science, Technology 
and Innovation, Mr. Aldo Rebelo, Brazil “had a protec-
tionist legislation which was criminalizing research. It 
was holding back scientific research and development 
based on biodiversity, as well as private investment in 
research”. Mr. Rebelo added that “the new legislation 
protects the environment, research, traditional knowl-
edge, and innovation in industry, thus encouraging the 
creation of new jobs, income and tax revenues”. “Brazilian 
President signs new biodiversity law”, www.moellerip.
com/brazilian-president-signs-new-biodiversity-law/
18. See Daniel R. Pinto, “Roundtable 3: Disclosure 
Requirements relating to GRs and Associated TK”, 
Seminar on Intellectual Property and Genetic 
Resources, May 26-27, 2016, WIPO/IPTK/GE/16 and 
WIPO/GRTKF/IC/30/10 PROV. 2, pp.18-23.
19. Edson Beas Rodrigues Jr., supra note 10, pp.118-119.
5. Legal nature
1. See also section 7 on placement.
2. WIPO, Document SCP/5/6, para 34.
3. However, a knowingly false, fraudulent or deceptive 
disclosure might, in principle, be sanctioned outside 
the patent system.
4. German Federal Law Gazette of 1981, p.1.
5. German Federal Law Gazette of 2013, p.3830.
6. As regards the consequences of non-compliance 
with these provisions, see section 13 on remedies 
and sanctions.
7. Article 10(4) of the Patents Act, 1970, as amended by 
the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2005, provides:
“Every complete specification shall (a) fully and par -
ticularly describe the invention and its operation or 
use and the method by which it is to be performed; (b) 
disclose the best method of performing the invention 
which is known to the applicant and for which he is 
entitled to claim protection.”
8. For example, the substantive examination of a 
mandatory disclosure requirement may raise a ques -
tion of private international law, such as when the 
legitimacy of the access to, and use of, GRs/TK is 
based on a permit or contract under the law of another 
country. Assuming there is a sufficiently close link 
between the GR/TK and a claimed invention, a patent 
office may be required to interpret and assess the 
validity and scope of contractual obligations under 
the relevant foreign law. Doing so would determine 
whether the nature of the invention and the act of 
filing of a patent application for that invention in 
the patent office’s own jurisdiction was consistent 
with the contractual obligations under the law of 
the source country.
6. Formative and substantive 
requirements
1. See also section 13 on remedies and sanctions. 
2. For more information about formal or substantive 
requirements, see WIPO Technical Study (2004), 
pp.16, 32, 47-49.
3. Ibid .
7. Placement
1. See also section 8 on the subject matter of disclosure 
– patent rights versus other IP rights.
2. Federal Law Nº 13.123/2015 New Legal Framework 
concerning Brazilian Biodiversity, www.mattosfilho.
com.br/EscritorioMidia/memoamb190615en.pdf 
3. Law No. 2016-1087 of August 8, 2016 on the recovery 
of biodiversity, nature and landscapes : www.wipo.int/
wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=16565 
4. For more information, see section 13 on remedies 
and sanctions to address situations of non-compliance.
5. For more information, see section 12 on triggers.
8. Subject matter
1. See Article 2 of the CBD and the Nagoya Protocol, 
as well as the definitions in document WIPO/
GRTKF/IC/34/4, Second Revision of the Consolidated 
Document Relating to Intellectual Property and 
Genetic Resources (as at the close of IGC 30 on June 
3, 2016).
2. Lyle Glowka et al. (eds.), A Guide to the Convention 
on Biological Diversity, Environmental Policy and 
Law Paper no. 30 (Gland; Cambridge: IUCN the World 
Conservation Union, 1994), p.21-22.
3. See pp.29-30 and Claudio Chiarolla, “Genetic re -
sources” in Elisa Morgera and Kati Kulovesi (eds.) 

59
Endnotes
Research Handbook on International Law and Natural 
Resources (Edward Elgar, 2016).
4. WIPO Glossary, www.wipo.int/tk/en/resources/
glossary.html #49
5. Article 16(D)(ii) of the Bonn Guidelines on Access 
to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing 
of the Benefits Arising Out of Their Utilization (2002).
6. CBD Article 2.
7. The IUCN Explanatory Guide to the Nagoya Protocol 
(2012) explains that “[…] the biochemical components 
of genetic resources […] are the non-modified chemical 
components, other than DNA or RNA, formed by the 
organisms’ metabolic processes that exist in samples 
of biological materials (that is, active biological 
components found in collected material) and that 
have yet to be modified and used in technological 
applications.” Available at: https:/ /cmsdata.iucn.
org/downloads/an_explanatory_guide_to_the_na -
goya_protocol.pdf , p.67.
8. Ibid., p.26.
9. Ibid. However, Parties that decide to require PIC 
for access to their GRs will need to regulate expressly 
R&D on both the genetic material and any naturally 
occurring biochemical compounds contained in ma -
terial acquired under their domestic ABS framework.
10. Ibid., p.65.
11. Ibid. , p.67.
12. Under the Nagoya Protocol, Penicillin, the origi -
nal antibiotic, is a “derivative” of the fungal species 
Penicilium notatum in that it is formed by that par -
ticular organism. On the other hand, a wide range of 
products that might be considered as derived from a 
GR in a general sense would not qualify as “derivatives” 
in accordance with the legal definition provided in 
the Nagoya Protocol. A good example is “Captopril”, 
the first of the ACE inhibitor class of drugs, whose 
discovery was inspired by the observed physiological 
effect of venom of the Brazilian viper Bothrops jararaca. 
Captopril is an orally active synthetic chemical and 
mimics the effect of the venom’s active compound, but 
not its chemistry. In the context of patent disclosure, 
applying disclosure requirements not just to claimed 
inventions comprising unmodified biochemical 
compounds, but also to other substances resulting 
directly from their utilization would appear to go 
beyond what might be enabled by the provisions 
of the Nagoya Protocol. For example, an attempt to 
capture biochemical products as different as Captopril 
and the other members of the ACE inhibitor class of 
cardiovascular treatments derived from snake venom 
is likely to be controversial.
13. Claudio Chiarolla, “The role of private international 
law under the Nagoya Protocol”, in E. Morgera, M. 
Buck and E. Tsioumani (eds.), The Nagoya Protocol 
in Perspective: Implications for International Law and 
Implementation Challenges (Brill/Martinus Nijhoff, 
2013).
14. See further WIPO Guide to Intellectual Property 
Issues in Access and Benefit-Sharing Agreements, WIPO, 
2018. The WIPO Guide is available at: https:/ /www.
wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_1052.pdf . 
9. Content
1. As regards, for example, marine GRs from areas 
beyond national jurisdiction, see: Claudio Chiarolla, 
“The work of WIPO and its possible relevance for 
global ocean governance”, in IMO-IMLI Comprehensive 
Study on Effective and Sustainable Global Ocean 
Governance (forthcoming in 2017) and Claudio 
Chiarolla, “Intellectual property rights and benefit 
sharing: the emerging case of marine genetic resources 
in areas beyond national jurisdiction”, Queen Mary 
Journal of Intellectual Property 3 (2014). See also 
section 11 on exclusions.
11. Exclusions
1. See CBD COP 2 Decision II/11, paragraph 1(a), 
Access To Genetic Resources, available at: ht t p s ://
w w w.cbd.int/decision/cop/?id=7084
2. For more details, see Box 27.
3. See “Bioethics and patent law: the cases of Moore and 
the Hagahai People”, in WIPO Magazine (September 
2006), www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/en/2006/05/
article_0008.html
4. For a review of legal and policy developments 
pertaining to the issue of gene patents in this field 
see, “Myriad gene patent litigation”, in Genomics Law 
Report, https:/ /www.genomicslawreport.com/index.
php/category/badges/myriad-gene-patent-litigation/
5. This may be considered as TK that is so widely dis-
persed and “unmoored” from any particular origin that 
no legitimate benefit claimants could be identified.
6. See, for example, WIPO/GRTKF/IC/34/4, Second 
Revision of the Consolidated Document Relating 
to Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, 
Article 4, ALT 4.1.
7. Ibid., (ALT) Article 4.1(f).
8. Ibid., Article 4.
12. Triggers
1. See Figure 1 on derivatives.
2. See the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 
signed in Vienna on May 23, 1969, and which entered 
into force on January 27, 1980.
3. Definition of research in English, www.oxforddictio-
naries.com/us/definition/american_english/research
4. Apart from upstream R&D activities, there are also 
downstream activities of value that may be patented 
but fall outside patents on biochemical products per se. 
The “development” part of R&D includes the industrial 
production system and production methods, which 
are often the subject of patents (e.g., recombinant 
DNA and metabolic engineering methods such as 
those used for engineering yeast cells to produce 
plant metabolites). These patented processes may in 
fact be extremely valuable. This begs the important 
question whether a trigger should limit the application 
of a new PDR to patents having product claims only 
or whether it might also be extended to “secondary 
patenting” including process patents.
5. However, the use of such a trigger in respect of the 
utilization of TK would have to be carefully tested, 
since what would constitute “utilization of TK” is not 
defined by the Nagoya Protocol.
6. For example, a new plant variety obtained by the 
selection of a natural or induced mutant, or of a so -
maclonal variant, the selection of a variant individual 
from plants of the initial variety, backcrossing, or 
transformation by genetic engineering. See UPOV 
(August 31, 2009) “Explanatory Notes on Essentially 
Derived Varieties under the 1991 Act of the UPOV 
Convention”, www.upov.int/edocs/mdocs/upov/
en/c/43/upov_exn_edv_draft_3.pdf
7. Paul Oldham (2004), “Global Status and Trends in 
Intellectual Property Claims: Genomics, Proteomics 
and Biotechnology”, UNEP/CBD/WG-ABS/3/INF/4, 
p. 5. Oldham also emphasizes that “the nature of 
genetic homologies between organisms signifies 
that intellectual property claims in relation to the 
biological or genetic components of one organism 
may permit intellectual property claims in relation 
to the biological or genetic components of other 
organisms […]”.
8. WTO, “The TRIPS Agreement and Convention on 
Biological Diversity”, IP/C/W/368/Rev.1, revised 8 
February 2006, p. 32.
13. Remedies and sanctions
1. Article 170-bis, paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, of Industrial 
Property Code (Legislative Decree No. 30 of February 
10, 2005, as amended up to Legislative Decree No. 131 
of August 13, 2010) provide:
“2. The observations from third parties and the 
observations which result from the examination of 
the application for new plant varieties are commu-
nicated to the interested party granting a term for 
response not longer than six months. In the event 
that an observation refers to the denomination, the 
new proposal is to be accompanied by a supple -
mental declaration also including the declaration 
indicated in letter e) of paragraph 1 of Article 165. 
The Office and the Ministry of Agricultural and 
Forestry Policies communicate to each other their 
comments and the observations transmitted to the 
applicant and the responses received.
“3. When due to irregularities in the appointment 
of the attorney, as per Article 201, the failure to 
comply with the observations determines the 
rejection of the application and the related re -
quests, the observations must be communicated 
to the applicant.
“4. When the term has elapsed without receiving 
a response to the observations, the application or 
request is rejected by a decision to be notified to 
the owner of the application or the request, by a 
registered mail letter, return receipt requested. 
However, if the observation concerns the claim of 
a right of priority, failure to respond determines 
only the loss of that right.”
2. Article 59, paragraph 2, of Federal Act of June 25, 
1954 states: “If the patent application does not meet 
the other requirements of this Act or the Ordinance, 
the Institute shall set a time limit for the patent ap -
plicant by which the deficiencies must be remedied.”
3. Such evidence may include, for example, written 
materials about existing inventions that may pre-
empt the requested patent (see further section 14 
on evidence).
4. See Tracy Lewis and Jerome Reichman, Using liablity 
rules to stimulate local innovation in developing coun -
tries: Application to traditional knowledge, in K. Mascus 
and J. Reichman (eds), International Public Goods and 
Transfer of Technology Under a Globalized Intellectual 
Property Regime (Cambridge UP), pp. 337-366.
5. See also section 18, pp.54-55 on subject matter 
eligibility.
14. Evidence
1. Article 116, Oral Proceedings, The European Patent 
Convention, Amended on October 27, 2005, entered 
into effect on December 13, 2007.
15. Standing
1. The Pelargonium Patent Challenges, available 
at: https://www.publiceye.ch/fileadmin/files/
documents/Biodiversitaet/080505_Factsheet_
Pelargoniumpatente_final_en.pdf
2. Pelargonium Patent Challenge against Dr. Willmar 
Schwabe, African Centre for Biodiversity, available 
at: http://acbio.org.za/pelargonium -patent-chal -
lenge-against-dr-willmar-schwabe/
16. Capacity
1. Regional Biodiversity Strategy for the Tropical 
Andean Countries, Decision 523, Andean Community, 

60
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
intranet.comunidadandina.org/Documentos/deci -
siones/DEC523.doc 
2. See also Box 12.
3. See the African Intellectual Property Organization, 
www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/aspac/en/wipo_tm_
tyo_12/wipo_tm_tyo_12_z_oapi.pdf
4. African Regional Patent Systems and the PCT: Brief 
Overview of the ARIPO Patent System, http:/ /www.
wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/pct/en/wipo_pct_nbo_09/
wipo_pct_nbo_09_www_121074.pdf
5. See the Eurasian Patent Organization, with the 
Eurasian Patent Office acting as its executive body, 
www.eapo.org/en /
6. See Committee on Development and Intellectual 
Property (CDIP), Eighth Session Geneva, November 
14-18, 2011, Study on Patents and the Public Domain, 
CDIP/8/INF/3 REV. 2.
7. Introduction IKSCD Project, www.ufh.ac.za/cen -
tres-and-institutes/emthonjeni/sites/default/files/
INTRODUCTION%20IKSDC%20PROJECT.pdf
8. “The National Recordal System”, presentation by 
Yonah Seleti, www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/tk/en/
wipo_iptk_ge_2_15/wipo_iptk_ge_2_15_presen -
tation_yonah_seleti.pdf
9. See Inspiring Innovation and Sustaining Traditional 
Knowledge – WIPO’s Capacity-building Program, 
Traditional Knowledge Division WIPO, June 25, 
2015, www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/tk/en/wipo_iptk_
ge_2_15/wipo_iptk_ge_2_15_presentation_tk_
side_event.pdf
17. Relationship with other instruments
1. See also section 3, pp.15-16 on objectives – comple-
mentarity and mutual supportiveness with interna -
tional agreements.
2. Nagoya Protocol, Article 14, https:/ /absch.cbd.int/
3. Nagoya Protocol, Article 17.
4. In fact, in the period that preceded the coming into 
effect of the Nagoya Protocol, patent/IP offices became 
the first “checkpoints” ever established – at least in 
some in some countries – to monitor compliance 
with ABS obligations under the CBD.
5. Ultimately, the Nagoya Protocol did not include any 
provisions on PDRs, since there was disagreement on 
whether an indicative list of checkpoints should be 
referenced in the text.
6. UNCTAD, The Convention on Biological Diversity and 
the Nagoya Protocol: Intellectual Property Implications, 
A Handbook on the Interface between Global Access and 
Benefit Sharing Rules and Intellectual Property, (United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 
2014), p.56. 
7. C. Chiarolla, S. Louafi and M. Schloen, “Genetic 
resources for food and agriculture and farmers’ 
rights: an analysis of the relationship between the 
Nagoya Protocol and related instruments”, in The 
Nagoya Protocol in Perspective (2013).
8. Claudio Chiarolla, “Plant patenting, benefit sharing 
and the law applicable to the FAO Standard Material 
Transfer Agreement”, JWIP (2008) Vol.11 (1), pp.1-28.
9. Nagoya Protocol, Article 5.1.
10. Nagoya Protocol, Article 9.
11. Nagoya Protocol, Article 6.1.
12. Nagoya Protocol, Article 6.2.
13. Nagoya Protocol, Article 7.
14. Nagoya Protocol, Article 6.3.
15. ITPGRFA Article 13.2(d)(ii).
16. Nagoya Protocol, Article 4.3
17. See Section 4.1. of the PIP Framework , available 
at https://www.who.int/influenza/resources/pip_
framework/en/
18. See Section 6.13.4 of the PIP Framework and Article 
6 of the Standard Material Transfer Agreement 1 
(SMTA 1), both available at https://www.who.int/
influenza/resources/pip_framework/en/
19. See https://www.un.org/bbnj/
18. Other measures
1. It has been highlighted that “due diligence refers 
to the judgment and decisions that can reasonably 
be expected from a person or entity in a given situ -
ation. […] As such it is not intended to guarantee a 
certain outcome or aiming at perfection, but it calls 
for thoroughness and best possible efforts. […] If a 
user […] takes reasonable measures in the seeking, 
keeping, transferring and analyzing of information, 
the user will be compliant with the due diligence 
obligation under the EU ABS Regulation.” Swedish 
Environmental Protection Agency (2016), “Guidance 
on the EU ABS Regulation implementing the Nagoya 
Protocol”, https://www.naturvardsverket.se/upload/
stod-i-miljoarbetet/vagledning/genetiskaresurser/
scope-guidance-march2016.pdf
2. For example, see Box 9 above.
3. For example, in the case of insolvency of a first user 
of GRs/TK with whom MAT were initially concluded, 
it would be impossible to enforce any obligations in 
those terms against a third-party creditor who has 
acquired the remaining assets (e.g., background and 
foreground IP, research tools and materials). See also 
WIPO Guide to Intellectual Property Issues in Access 
and Benefit-Sharing Agreements, WIPO, 2018 (chapters 
1-3).. The WIPO Guide on IP Issues in ABS Contracts is 
available at: https:/ /www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/
en/wipo_pub_1052.pdf
4. Historically, the origins of these “traditions” are to 
some extent mixed with roots in the Indian subcon -
tinent, Persia, Muslim Arabia and Ancient Greece.
5. “Protecting India’s traditional knowledge”, WIPO 
Magazine, June 2011, www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/
en/2011/03/article_0002.html
6. Biswajit Dhar,“Relevance of databases for protecting 
traditional knowledge: evidence from India”, Seminar 
on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, 
WIPO, Geneva, May 26-27, 2016.
7. Ibid.
8. David Pearce “India’s claims to Traditional 
Knowledge washed up and spat out”, July 21, 
2015, http://ipkitten.blogspot.ch/2015/07/indi- 
as-claims-to-traditional-knowledge.html ; David 
Pearce, “An analysis of TKDL at the EPO”, July 25, 
2015, http:/ /tuftythecat.blogspot.ch/2015/07/an- 
analysis-of-tkdl-at-epo.html ; and Darren Smyth, “No 
traditional knowledge for hair loss treatment: another 
alleged attempt to patent traditional knowledge does 
not bear scrutiny”, August 3, 2015, http://ipkitten. 
blogspot.ch/2015/08/no-traditional-knowledge- 
for-hair-loss.html
9. WIPO Toolkit on Traditional Knowledge 
Documentation, WIPO, 2017. The WIPO Toolkit (2017) 
is available at: https:/ /www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/
en/wipo_pub_1049.pdf . See also D.F. Robinson and C. 
Chiarolla, “The role of databases, contracts and codes 
of conduct”, in D. Robinson, P. Roffe and A. Abdel- 
Latif (eds.), Protecting Traditional Knowledge: The 
Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property 
and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and 
Folklore. Routledge/Earthscan Press, 2017.
10. In general, a tiered approach to the scope of TK 
protection is an approach “[…] whereby different 
kinds or levels of rights or measures would be avail- 
able to rights holders depending on the nature and 
characteristics of the subject matter, the level of 
control retained by the beneficiaries and its degree 
of diffusion. The tiered approach proposes differen -
tiated protection along a spectrum from TK that is 
available to the general public to TK that is secret/ 
not known outside the community and controlled by 
the beneficiaries.” See Ian Goss (2016), WIPO/GRTKF/ 
IC/32/REF/INFORMATION NOTE.

61
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
This table comprises a non-exhaustive selection of extracts 
from existing legislative texts which, in one way or another, 
provide for a specific disclosure requirement related to ge-
netic resources and/or traditional knowledge. The extracts 
are taken directly from the legislative texts as contained in 
WIPO’s global database, WIPO Lex. The table contains no 
interpretation or commentary. In order to facilitate the read-
ing and comprehension of the table, some relevant parts of 
the extracts may appear in bold, but this highlighting does 
not appear in the original legislative texts. All information 
provided is for information purposes only, and is not a 
substitute for legal advice. The WIPO Secretariat makes 
every effort to ensure, but cannot guarantee, the accuracy 
of the data contained in this selection. In particular, WIPO 
assumes no responsibility for any discrepancy that may 
occur in the electronic manipulation of the said data. The 
WIPO Secretariat will continue to add to and update the 
table over time. Additional contributions to the table, and 
any corrections and comments, would be appreciated and 
may be sent to grtkf@wipo.int.
The current version of the Disclosure Requirements Table 
was updated as at May 2019. Further updates will be made 
available on the WIPO website: www.wipo.int.

62
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Andean Community Decision No. 486 Establishing the Common Industrial 
Property Regime (2000)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=9451)
Article 26
1. genetic resources or products derived
therefrom
2. traditional knowledge
of the indigenous AfroAmerican or local
communities of member
countries.
Article 26. The application for a patent shall 
be filed with the competent national office and 
shall contain the following:
[…]
(h) where applicable, a copy of the access 
contract where the products or processes 
for which a patent is sought have been 
obtained or developed from genetic re -
sources or products derived therefrom of 
which any of the member countries is the 
country of origin; (i) where applicable, a copy 
of the document accrediting the licensing or 
the authorization of the use of the traditional 
knowledge of the indigenous AfroAmerican 
or local communities of member countries 
where the products or processes for which 
protection is sought have been obtained 
or developed from such knowledge of 
which any of the member countries is 
the country of origin, in accordance with 
the provisions of Decision 391 and such 
of its amendments and implementing 
regulations as are in force.
Article 26. The application for a patent shall be 
filed with the competent national office and shall 
contain the following:
[…]
(h) where applicable, a copy of the access 
contract where the products or processes for 
which a patent is sought have been obtained or 
developed from genetic resources or products 
derived therefrom of which any of the member 
countries is the country of origin; (i) where ap-
plicable, a copy of the document accrediting 
the licensing or the authorization of the use 
of the traditional knowledge of the indigenous 
AfroAmerican or local communities of member 
countries where the products or processes for 
which protection is sought have been obtained or 
developed from such knowledge of which any of 
the member countries is the country of origin, in 
accordance with the provisions of Decision 391 
and such of its amendments and implementing 
regulations as are in force.
Article 42. Within a period of 60 days following the 
publication date, any person having a legitimate 
interest may file one reasoned opposition 
contesting the patentability of the invention.
Article 39. If it emerges from the examination 
as to form that the application does not meet 
the conditions specified in Articles 26 and 27, 
the competent national office shall inform 
the applicant accordingly, so that he may 
meet those conditions within a period of two 
months following the date of notification. That 
period may be extended once by an equal 
amount at a request of a party without any 
loss of priority. If, on the expiry of the period 
specified, the applicant has not met the conditions 
mentioned, the application shall be considered 
abandoned and its priority shall be lost. The 
competent national office shall nevertheless 
respect the confidentiality of the application.
Article 75. The competent national authority 
shall decree the absolute invalidity of a patent 
at any time, either ex officio or at the request 
of any person, where:
…
(g) where applicable, a copy of the access contract 
has not been filed where the products or processes 
to which the patent application relates have been 
produced or developed with genetic resources 
or derived products of which any of the member 
countries is the country of origin;
(h) where applicable, a copy of the document 
evidencing the licensing or authorization of the 
use of traditional knowledge of the indigenous 
AfroAmerican or local communities of the member 
countries has not been filed where the products 
or processes for which protection is sought have 
been produced or developed on the basis of such 
knowledge of which one of the member countries 
is the country of origin.
Belgium Law of March 28,1984 on Patents
(Law of March 28, 1984 on Patents) (updated on December 
22, 2008)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/fr/legislation/details/11665)
Article 15.1.
[…] biological material of plant or animal origin.
Article 15.1.
The patent application shall contain the fol-
lowing:
[…] 
(6) a statement of the geographical origin of 
the biological material of plant or animal origin, 
from which the invention was developed, 
where such origin is known.
Article 15.1.
The patent application shall contain the following:
(6) a statement of the geographical origin 
of the biological material of plant or animal 
origin, from which the invention was developed, 
where such origin is known.
Brazil Law No. 13.123 of May 20, 2015 (Access and Benefits 
Sharing of Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional 
Knowledge)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=15741)
Article 47
[…] granting of an intellectual property right […] 
of a finished product or of reproductive material 
obtained through access to genetic heritage or 
the associated traditional knowledge.
Article 47
The granting of an intellectual property 
right by the competent body in respect of a 
finished product or of reproductive material 
obtained through access to genetic heritage 
or the associated traditional knowledge is 
conditional upon registration or authorization, 
in accordance with the provisions of this Law.
Article 47
The granting of an intellectual property right 
by the competent body in respect of a finished 
product or of reproductive material obtained 
through access to genetic heritage or the asso-
ciated traditional knowledge is conditional upon 
registration or authorization, in accordance 
with the provisions of this Law.

63
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Andean Community Decision No. 486 Establishing the Common Industrial 
Property Regime (2000)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=9451)
Article 26
1. genetic resources or products derived
therefrom
2. traditional knowledge
of the indigenous AfroAmerican or local
communities of member
countries.
Article 26. The application for a patent shall 
be filed with the competent national office and 
shall contain the following:
[…]
(h) where applicable, a copy of the access 
contract where the products or processes 
for which a patent is sought have been 
obtained or developed from genetic re -
sources or products derived therefrom of 
which any of the member countries is the 
country of origin; (i) where applicable, a copy 
of the document accrediting the licensing or 
the authorization of the use of the traditional 
knowledge of the indigenous AfroAmerican 
or local communities of member countries 
where the products or processes for which 
protection is sought have been obtained 
or developed from such knowledge of 
which any of the member countries is 
the country of origin, in accordance with 
the provisions of Decision 391 and such 
of its amendments and implementing 
regulations as are in force.
Article 26. The application for a patent shall be 
filed with the competent national office and shall 
contain the following:
[…]
(h) where applicable, a copy of the access 
contract where the products or processes for 
which a patent is sought have been obtained or 
developed from genetic resources or products 
derived therefrom of which any of the member 
countries is the country of origin; (i) where ap-
plicable, a copy of the document accrediting 
the licensing or the authorization of the use 
of the traditional knowledge of the indigenous 
AfroAmerican or local communities of member 
countries where the products or processes for 
which protection is sought have been obtained or 
developed from such knowledge of which any of 
the member countries is the country of origin, in 
accordance with the provisions of Decision 391 
and such of its amendments and implementing 
regulations as are in force.
Article 42. Within a period of 60 days following the 
publication date, any person having a legitimate 
interest may file one reasoned opposition 
contesting the patentability of the invention.
Article 39. If it emerges from the examination 
as to form that the application does not meet 
the conditions specified in Articles 26 and 27, 
the competent national office shall inform 
the applicant accordingly, so that he may 
meet those conditions within a period of two 
months following the date of notification. That 
period may be extended once by an equal 
amount at a request of a party without any 
loss of priority. If, on the expiry of the period 
specified, the applicant has not met the conditions 
mentioned, the application shall be considered 
abandoned and its priority shall be lost. The 
competent national office shall nevertheless 
respect the confidentiality of the application.
Article 75. The competent national authority 
shall decree the absolute invalidity of a patent 
at any time, either ex officio or at the request 
of any person, where:
…
(g) where applicable, a copy of the access contract 
has not been filed where the products or processes 
to which the patent application relates have been 
produced or developed with genetic resources 
or derived products of which any of the member 
countries is the country of origin;
(h) where applicable, a copy of the document 
evidencing the licensing or authorization of the 
use of traditional knowledge of the indigenous 
AfroAmerican or local communities of the member 
countries has not been filed where the products 
or processes for which protection is sought have 
been produced or developed on the basis of such 
knowledge of which one of the member countries 
is the country of origin.
Belgium Law of March 28,1984 on Patents
(Law of March 28, 1984 on Patents) (updated on December 
22, 2008)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/fr/legislation/details/11665)
Article 15.1.
[…] biological material of plant or animal origin.
Article 15.1.
The patent application shall contain the fol-
lowing:
[…] 
(6) a statement of the geographical origin of 
the biological material of plant or animal origin, 
from which the invention was developed, 
where such origin is known.
Article 15.1.
The patent application shall contain the following:
(6) a statement of the geographical origin 
of the biological material of plant or animal 
origin, from which the invention was developed, 
where such origin is known.
Brazil Law No. 13.123 of May 20, 2015 (Access and Benefits 
Sharing of Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional 
Knowledge)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=15741)
Article 47
[…] granting of an intellectual property right […] 
of a finished product or of reproductive material 
obtained through access to genetic heritage or 
the associated traditional knowledge.
Article 47
The granting of an intellectual property 
right by the competent body in respect of a 
finished product or of reproductive material 
obtained through access to genetic heritage 
or the associated traditional knowledge is 
conditional upon registration or authorization, 
in accordance with the provisions of this Law.
Article 47
The granting of an intellectual property right 
by the competent body in respect of a finished 
product or of reproductive material obtained 
through access to genetic heritage or the asso-
ciated traditional knowledge is conditional upon 
registration or authorization, in accordance 
with the provisions of this Law.

64
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Decree No. 8.772 of May 11, 2016 regulating Law No. 
13.123 of May 20, 2015
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/16116)
Article 80. Filing for an intellectual property 
right, as a result of access to genetic resources 
or associated traditional knowledge, in Brazil 
or abroad, without effecting the requisite prior 
registration.
A natural person shall be fined a minimum of 
R$3,000.00 (three thousand reais) and a max-
imum of R$30,000.00 (thirty thousand reais).
An incorporated legal person, such as a 
micro-enterprise, a small business or a tra-
ditional farmers’ cooperative with a gross 
annual revenue equal to or less than the 
ceiling set in Article 3, subparagraph II, of 
Supplementary Law No. 123 of 2006, shall be 
fined a minimum of R$10,000.00 (ten thousand 
reais) and a maximum of R$200,000.00 (two 
hundred thousand reais).
Other legal persons shall be fined a minimum 
of R$20,000.00 (twenty thousand reais) and 
a maximum of R$10,000,000.00 (ten million 
reais).
Burundi Law No. 1/13 of July 28, 2009 relating To
Industrial Property in Burundi
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/8324)
Article 21
genetic or
biological resources, traditional knowledge 
Article 21
The description must contain a clear indication 
of the origin of the genetic or biological 
resources collected in the territory of 
Burundi and used directly or indirectly 
in the making of the claimed invention 
as well as any element of the traditional 
knowledge which may or may not be 
linked to these resources that is protected 
under Title V of this part and that has been 
used directly or indirectly in the making of the 
claimed invention without the prior informed 
consent of its individual or joint creators.
Article 21
The description must contain a clear indication 
of the origin of the genetic or biological re -
sources collected in the territory of Burundi 
and used directly or indirectly in the making of 
the claimed invention as well as any element of 
the traditional knowledge which may or may 
not be linked to these resources that is protected 
under Title V of this part and that has been used 
directly or indirectly in the making of the claimed 
invention without the prior informed consent of 
its individual or joint creators.
Article 406. The competent authority shall be 
entitled to claim ownership of any patent appli-
cation filed or any patent granted in a manner 
which does not comply with the provisions of 
Article 21 concerning genetic resources.
China Patent Law of the People’s Republic of China (as amended 
up to the Decision of December 27, 2008, regarding the 
Revision of the Patent Law of the People’s Republic of China)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=5484)
Article 26
Genetic resources
Article 26. With regard to an invention-cre-
ation accomplished by relying on genetic 
resources, the applicant shall, in the patent 
application documents, indicate the direct 
and original source of the genetic resources.
Article 26. With regard to an invention-creation 
accomplished by relying on genetic resources, 
the applicant shall, in the patent application 
documents, indicate the direct and original 
source of the genetic resources.
Article 5. Patent rights shall not be granted for 
inventions that are accomplished by relying on 
genetic resources which are obtained or used in 
violation of the provisions of laws and adminis-
trative regulations.
Article 26. If the applicant cannot indicate the 
original source, he shall state the reasons.
Implementing Rules of the Patent Law of the People’s 
Republic of China (promulgated by Decree No. 306 of the 
State Council of China on June 15, 2001, and revised by 
the Decision of January 9, 2010, of the State Council on 
Amending the Rules for the Implementation of the Patent 
Law of the People’s Republic of China)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=6504)
Article 26 (Newly added)
The genetic resources referred to in the Patent 
Law means any material taken from human, 
animal, plant or microorganism, containing 
genetically functioning units with actual or 
potential value; the invention-creation accom-
plished depending on the genetic resources 
means those invention-creation of which the 
accomplishment uses the genetic function of 
genetic resources.
Where the applicant seeks to apply for patent 
for such invention-creation completed on ge -
netic resources, he or it shall so state in the 
request, fill in prescribed forms issued by the 
Patent Administration Department under the 
State Council.
Article 26 (Newly added)
The genetic resources referred to in the Patent 
Law means any material taken from human, 
animal, plant or microorganism, containing 
genetically functioning units with actual or 
potential value; the invention-creation accom-
plished depending on the genetic resources 
means those invention-creation of which the 
accomplishment uses the genetic function of 
genetic resources.
Where the applicant seeks to apply for pat-
ent for such invention-creation completed 
on genetic resources, he or it shall so state 
in the request, fill in prescribed forms issued 
by the Patent Administration Department under 
the State Council.
Article 26 (Newly added)
The genetic resources referred to in the Patent Law 
means any material taken from human, animal, 
plant or microorganism, containing genetically 
functioning units with actual or potential value; the 
invention-creation accomplished depending on the 
genetic resources means those invention-creation 
of which the accomplishment uses the genetic 
function of genetic resources.
Where the applicant seeks to apply for patent 
for such invention-creation completed on ge -
netic resources, he or it shall so state in the 
request, fill in prescribed forms issued by the 
Patent Administration Department under the 
State Council.
Rule 53
In accordance with the provisions of Article 38 of 
the Patent Law, the circumstances where an 
application for a patent for invention shall be 
rejected by the Patent Administration Department 
under the State Council after examination as to 
substance are as follows:
[…]
(2)
Where the application does not comply with the 
provisions of […] Article 26, paragraph […] 
five […] of the Patent Law […]

65
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Decree No. 8.772 of May 11, 2016 regulating Law No. 
13.123 of May 20, 2015
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/16116)
Article 80. Filing for an intellectual property 
right, as a result of access to genetic resources 
or associated traditional knowledge, in Brazil 
or abroad, without effecting the requisite prior 
registration.
A natural person shall be fined a minimum of 
R$3,000.00 (three thousand reais) and a max-
imum of R$30,000.00 (thirty thousand reais).
An incorporated legal person, such as a 
micro-enterprise, a small business or a tra-
ditional farmers’ cooperative with a gross 
annual revenue equal to or less than the 
ceiling set in Article 3, subparagraph II, of 
Supplementary Law No. 123 of 2006, shall be 
fined a minimum of R$10,000.00 (ten thousand 
reais) and a maximum of R$200,000.00 (two 
hundred thousand reais).
Other legal persons shall be fined a minimum 
of R$20,000.00 (twenty thousand reais) and 
a maximum of R$10,000,000.00 (ten million 
reais).
Burundi Law No. 1/13 of July 28, 2009 relating To
Industrial Property in Burundi
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/8324)
Article 21
genetic or
biological resources, traditional knowledge 
Article 21
The description must contain a clear indication 
of the origin of the genetic or biological 
resources collected in the territory of 
Burundi and used directly or indirectly 
in the making of the claimed invention 
as well as any element of the traditional 
knowledge which may or may not be 
linked to these resources that is protected 
under Title V of this part and that has been 
used directly or indirectly in the making of the 
claimed invention without the prior informed 
consent of its individual or joint creators.
Article 21
The description must contain a clear indication 
of the origin of the genetic or biological re -
sources collected in the territory of Burundi 
and used directly or indirectly in the making of 
the claimed invention as well as any element of 
the traditional knowledge which may or may 
not be linked to these resources that is protected 
under Title V of this part and that has been used 
directly or indirectly in the making of the claimed 
invention without the prior informed consent of 
its individual or joint creators.
Article 406. The competent authority shall be 
entitled to claim ownership of any patent appli-
cation filed or any patent granted in a manner 
which does not comply with the provisions of 
Article 21 concerning genetic resources.
China Patent Law of the People’s Republic of China (as amended 
up to the Decision of December 27, 2008, regarding the 
Revision of the Patent Law of the People’s Republic of China)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=5484)
Article 26
Genetic resources
Article 26. With regard to an invention-cre-
ation accomplished by relying on genetic 
resources, the applicant shall, in the patent 
application documents, indicate the direct 
and original source of the genetic resources.
Article 26. With regard to an invention-creation 
accomplished by relying on genetic resources, 
the applicant shall, in the patent application 
documents, indicate the direct and original 
source of the genetic resources.
Article 5. Patent rights shall not be granted for 
inventions that are accomplished by relying on 
genetic resources which are obtained or used in 
violation of the provisions of laws and adminis-
trative regulations.
Article 26. If the applicant cannot indicate the 
original source, he shall state the reasons.
Implementing Rules of the Patent Law of the People’s 
Republic of China (promulgated by Decree No. 306 of the 
State Council of China on June 15, 2001, and revised by 
the Decision of January 9, 2010, of the State Council on 
Amending the Rules for the Implementation of the Patent 
Law of the People’s Republic of China)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=6504)
Article 26 (Newly added)
The genetic resources referred to in the Patent 
Law means any material taken from human, 
animal, plant or microorganism, containing 
genetically functioning units with actual or 
potential value; the invention-creation accom-
plished depending on the genetic resources 
means those invention-creation of which the 
accomplishment uses the genetic function of 
genetic resources.
Where the applicant seeks to apply for patent 
for such invention-creation completed on ge -
netic resources, he or it shall so state in the 
request, fill in prescribed forms issued by the 
Patent Administration Department under the 
State Council.
Article 26 (Newly added)
The genetic resources referred to in the Patent 
Law means any material taken from human, 
animal, plant or microorganism, containing 
genetically functioning units with actual or 
potential value; the invention-creation accom-
plished depending on the genetic resources 
means those invention-creation of which the 
accomplishment uses the genetic function of 
genetic resources.
Where the applicant seeks to apply for pat-
ent for such invention-creation completed 
on genetic resources, he or it shall so state 
in the request, fill in prescribed forms issued 
by the Patent Administration Department under 
the State Council.
Article 26 (Newly added)
The genetic resources referred to in the Patent Law 
means any material taken from human, animal, 
plant or microorganism, containing genetically 
functioning units with actual or potential value; the 
invention-creation accomplished depending on the 
genetic resources means those invention-creation 
of which the accomplishment uses the genetic 
function of genetic resources.
Where the applicant seeks to apply for patent 
for such invention-creation completed on ge -
netic resources, he or it shall so state in the 
request, fill in prescribed forms issued by the 
Patent Administration Department under the 
State Council.
Rule 53
In accordance with the provisions of Article 38 of 
the Patent Law, the circumstances where an 
application for a patent for invention shall be 
rejected by the Patent Administration Department 
under the State Council after examination as to 
substance are as follows:
[…]
(2)
Where the application does not comply with the 
provisions of […] Article 26, paragraph […] 
five […] of the Patent Law […]

66
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Costa Rica Law No. 7788 of April 30, 1998, on Biodiversity (as amended 
by Law No. 8686 of November 21, 2008)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=11314)
ARTICLE 80
Prior consultation required
Both the National Seed Office and the Intellectual 
Property and Industrial Property Registries shall, as 
a matter of obligation, consult the Technical Office 
of the Commission before granting intellectual 
or industrial property protection to innovations 
involving elements of biodiversity. They shall 
in all cases provide the certificate of origin issued 
by the Technical Office of the Commission and 
the proof of prior consent.
ARTICLE 80
Prior consultation required
Both the National Seed Office and the 
Intellectual Property and Industrial Property 
Registries shall, as a matter of obligation, 
consult the Technical Office of the Commission 
before granting intellectual or industrial 
property protection to innovations involv-
ing elements of biodiversity. They shall in all 
cases provide the certificate of origin issued 
by the Technical Office of the Commission 
and the proof of prior consent.
Reasoned opposition by the Technical Office 
shall prevent registration of the patent or 
protection of the innovation.
ARTICLE 80
Prior consultation required
Both the National Seed Office and the Intellectual 
Property and Industrial Property Registries shall, as 
a matter of obligation, consult the Technical Office 
of the Commission before granting intellectual 
or industrial property protection to innovations 
involving elements of biodiversity. They shall in all 
cases provide the certificate of origin issued 
by the Technical Office of the Commission 
and the proof of prior consent
Reasoned opposition by the Technical Office shall 
prevent registration of the patent or protection 
of the innovation.
ARTICLE 80
Prior consultation required
Both the National Seed Office and the Intellectual 
Property and Industrial Property Registries shall, as 
a matter of obligation, consult the Technical Office 
of the Commission before granting intellectual 
or industrial property protection to innovations 
involving elements of biodiversity. They shall in 
all cases provide the certificate of origin issued 
by the Technical Office of the Commission and 
the proof of prior consent.
Reasoned opposition by the Technical Office 
shall prevent registration of the patent or 
protection of the innovation.
Cuba Decree-Law No. 290 of November 20, 2011, on Inventions 
and Industrial Designs and Models
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=12026)
ARTICLE 26.1.
biological material
ARTICLE 26.1.- To obtain a patent, an appli-
cant shall submit the appropriate application 
to the Office, together with the following 
documents:
[…]
(j) copy of the prior express authorization 
to Access biological material, issued by the 
competent authority in accordance with the 
applicable legislation, where the invention 
concerns such material, including genetic 
material and parts and derivatives thereof 
for which Cuba is the country of origin or 
which is present as a domesticated or 
cultivated species in Cuba;
(k) declaration stating that the biological 
material to which the invention refers 
was not obtained in the territory of the 
Republic of Cuba, in which case it should 
indicate the country of origin and source of 
the biological material and of the traditional 
knowledge associated with such material, 
together with the prior informed consent to 
access it;
[…]
ARTICLE 26.1.
To obtain a patent, the applicant shall submit the 
appropriate application to the Office, together 
with the following documents:
[…]
(j) copy of the prior and express authorization 
to Access biological material, issued by the 
competent authority in accordance with the 
applicable legislation, where the invention 
concerns such material, including genetic ma-
terial and parts and derivatives thereof for which 
Cuba is the country of origin or which is present 
as domesticated or cultivated species in Cuba;
(k) declaration stating that the biological 
material to which the invention refers was 
not obtained in the territory of the Republic of 
Cuba, in which case it should indicate the country 
of origin and source of the biological material 
and of the traditional knowledge associated with 
such material, together with the prior informed 
consent to access it;
 […]
ARTICLE 32.1.- Should any omission or irregularity 
be found in the documentation, the applicant shall 
be requested, subject to payment of the scheduled 
fee, to remedy said omission or remedy within 
sixty days as from the date of notification of the 
request. Before the above-mentioned time limit 
expires, however, the applicant may request the 
Office in writing to extend the time limit by another 
thirty days, subject to payment of the requisite fee.
2. If the applicant does not remedy the omission 
or irregularity within the established time limit, 
the application shall be deemed to have been 
abandoned, with no rights subsisting therein, 
save in the case of a request concerning only the 
unity of invention requirement, in which case the 
examination shall continue in respect of the first 
independent claim formulated and all claims that 
maintain unity of invention therewith.
Denmark Order No. 25 of January 18, 2013, on Patents and 
Supplementary Protection Certificates
https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/12938
Part I Chapter 2
3(5) biological material
Part I Chapter 2
The contents and filing of applications
[…]
3.-
[…]
(5) If an invention relates to or makes
use of a biological material, the patent
application shall contain information
about the geographical origin of the material 
if the applicant is aware thereof.
If the applicant is not aware of the
geographical origin of the material, that
shall appear from the application. Lack
of information about the geographical
origin of the material or about the applicant’s 
non-awareness thereof shall not affect the 
examination and other processing of the 
patent application or the validity of the rights 
conferred by the granted patent.
Part I Chapter 2
The contents and filing of applications
[…]
3.-
[…]
(5) If an invention relates to or makes
use of a biological material, the patent
application shall contain information
about the geographical origin of the material 
if the applicant is aware thereof.
If the applicant is not aware of the
geographical origin of the material, that
shall appear from the application . Lack of 
information about the geographical origin of the 
material or about the applicant’s non-awareness 
thereof shall not affect the examination and other 
processing of the patent application or the validity 
of the rights conferred by the granted patent.
Part I Chapter 2
The contents and filing of applications
[…]
3.-
[…]
(5) If an invention relates to or makes
use of a biological material, the patent
application shall contain information
about the geographical origin of the material if 
the applicant is aware thereof.
If the applicant is not aware of the
geographical origin of the material, that
shall appear from the application. Lack
of information about the geographical
origin of the material or about the applicant’s 
non-awareness thereof shall not affect the 
examination and other processing of the 
patent application or the validity of the rights 
conferred by the granted patent.

67
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Costa Rica Law No. 7788 of April 30, 1998, on Biodiversity (as amended 
by Law No. 8686 of November 21, 2008)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=11314)
ARTICLE 80
Prior consultation required
Both the National Seed Office and the Intellectual 
Property and Industrial Property Registries shall, as 
a matter of obligation, consult the Technical Office 
of the Commission before granting intellectual 
or industrial property protection to innovations 
involving elements of biodiversity. They shall 
in all cases provide the certificate of origin issued 
by the Technical Office of the Commission and 
the proof of prior consent.
ARTICLE 80
Prior consultation required
Both the National Seed Office and the 
Intellectual Property and Industrial Property 
Registries shall, as a matter of obligation, 
consult the Technical Office of the Commission 
before granting intellectual or industrial 
property protection to innovations involv-
ing elements of biodiversity. They shall in all 
cases provide the certificate of origin issued 
by the Technical Office of the Commission 
and the proof of prior consent.
Reasoned opposition by the Technical Office 
shall prevent registration of the patent or 
protection of the innovation.
ARTICLE 80
Prior consultation required
Both the National Seed Office and the Intellectual 
Property and Industrial Property Registries shall, as 
a matter of obligation, consult the Technical Office 
of the Commission before granting intellectual 
or industrial property protection to innovations 
involving elements of biodiversity. They shall in all 
cases provide the certificate of origin issued 
by the Technical Office of the Commission 
and the proof of prior consent
Reasoned opposition by the Technical Office shall 
prevent registration of the patent or protection 
of the innovation.
ARTICLE 80
Prior consultation required
Both the National Seed Office and the Intellectual 
Property and Industrial Property Registries shall, as 
a matter of obligation, consult the Technical Office 
of the Commission before granting intellectual 
or industrial property protection to innovations 
involving elements of biodiversity. They shall in 
all cases provide the certificate of origin issued 
by the Technical Office of the Commission and 
the proof of prior consent.
Reasoned opposition by the Technical Office 
shall prevent registration of the patent or 
protection of the innovation.
Cuba Decree-Law No. 290 of November 20, 2011, on Inventions 
and Industrial Designs and Models
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=12026)
ARTICLE 26.1.
biological material
ARTICLE 26.1.- To obtain a patent, an appli-
cant shall submit the appropriate application 
to the Office, together with the following 
documents:
[…]
(j) copy of the prior express authorization 
to Access biological material, issued by the 
competent authority in accordance with the 
applicable legislation, where the invention 
concerns such material, including genetic 
material and parts and derivatives thereof 
for which Cuba is the country of origin or 
which is present as a domesticated or 
cultivated species in Cuba;
(k) declaration stating that the biological 
material to which the invention refers 
was not obtained in the territory of the 
Republic of Cuba, in which case it should 
indicate the country of origin and source of 
the biological material and of the traditional 
knowledge associated with such material, 
together with the prior informed consent to 
access it;
[…]
ARTICLE 26.1.
To obtain a patent, the applicant shall submit the 
appropriate application to the Office, together 
with the following documents:
[…]
(j) copy of the prior and express authorization 
to Access biological material, issued by the 
competent authority in accordance with the 
applicable legislation, where the invention 
concerns such material, including genetic ma-
terial and parts and derivatives thereof for which 
Cuba is the country of origin or which is present 
as domesticated or cultivated species in Cuba;
(k) declaration stating that the biological 
material to which the invention refers was 
not obtained in the territory of the Republic of 
Cuba, in which case it should indicate the country 
of origin and source of the biological material 
and of the traditional knowledge associated with 
such material, together with the prior informed 
consent to access it;
 […]
ARTICLE 32.1.- Should any omission or irregularity 
be found in the documentation, the applicant shall 
be requested, subject to payment of the scheduled 
fee, to remedy said omission or remedy within 
sixty days as from the date of notification of the 
request. Before the above-mentioned time limit 
expires, however, the applicant may request the 
Office in writing to extend the time limit by another 
thirty days, subject to payment of the requisite fee.
2. If the applicant does not remedy the omission 
or irregularity within the established time limit, 
the application shall be deemed to have been 
abandoned, with no rights subsisting therein, 
save in the case of a request concerning only the 
unity of invention requirement, in which case the 
examination shall continue in respect of the first 
independent claim formulated and all claims that 
maintain unity of invention therewith.
Denmark Order No. 25 of January 18, 2013, on Patents and 
Supplementary Protection Certificates
https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/12938
Part I Chapter 2
3(5) biological material
Part I Chapter 2
The contents and filing of applications
[…]
3.-
[…]
(5) If an invention relates to or makes
use of a biological material, the patent
application shall contain information
about the geographical origin of the material 
if the applicant is aware thereof.
If the applicant is not aware of the
geographical origin of the material, that
shall appear from the application. Lack
of information about the geographical
origin of the material or about the applicant’s 
non-awareness thereof shall not affect the 
examination and other processing of the 
patent application or the validity of the rights 
conferred by the granted patent.
Part I Chapter 2
The contents and filing of applications
[…]
3.-
[…]
(5) If an invention relates to or makes
use of a biological material, the patent
application shall contain information
about the geographical origin of the material 
if the applicant is aware thereof.
If the applicant is not aware of the
geographical origin of the material, that
shall appear from the application . Lack of 
information about the geographical origin of the 
material or about the applicant’s non-awareness 
thereof shall not affect the examination and other 
processing of the patent application or the validity 
of the rights conferred by the granted patent.
Part I Chapter 2
The contents and filing of applications
[…]
3.-
[…]
(5) If an invention relates to or makes
use of a biological material, the patent
application shall contain information
about the geographical origin of the material if 
the applicant is aware thereof.
If the applicant is not aware of the
geographical origin of the material, that
shall appear from the application. Lack
of information about the geographical
origin of the material or about the applicant’s 
non-awareness thereof shall not affect the 
examination and other processing of the 
patent application or the validity of the rights 
conferred by the granted patent.

68
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Djibouti Law No. 50/AN/09/6th Lof July 19, 2009, on the Protection 
of Industrial Property
https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/6124
Article 34
genetic or biological resources, traditional 
knowledge 
Article 34
The description of the invention shall disclose 
the invention in a way that is sufficiently clear 
and complete to enable a person skilled in the 
art to carry it out. In particular, the description 
of the invention shall:
[…]
(b) indicate the background art which, as far 
as known to the applicant, can be regarded as 
useful for understanding the invention and the 
searching and examination of the invention in 
the event of a dispute, and, preferably, cite the 
documents reflecting such art. If the invention 
claimed has been developed or obtained 
directly from genetic or biological resourc-
es obtained from a particular source, or 
from the use of traditional knowledge 
obtained from a particular community, the 
description shall indicate the source of these 
resources or knowledge, as well as the way 
in which they have been obtained;
Article 34
The description of the invention shall disclose 
the invention in a way that is sufficiently clear 
and complete to enable a person skilled in the 
art to carry it out. In particular, the description 
of the invention shall:
[…]
(b) indicate the background art which, as far 
as known to the applicant, can be regarded as 
useful for understanding the invention and the 
searching and examination of the invention in 
the event of a dispute, and, preferably, cite the 
documents reflecting such art. If the invention 
claimed has been developed or obtained directly 
from genetic or biological resources obtained from 
a particular source, or from the use of traditional 
knowledge obtained from a particular community, 
the description shall indicate the source of 
these resources or knowledge, as well as 
the way in which they have been obtained;
Article 41
A patent application shall be refused if:
[…]
(g) its description or claims clearly do not 
meet the conditions provided for in Articles 
34 and 35, particularly where claims are not 
based on the description;
[…]
Ecuador National Regulations of the Common Regime Governing 
Access to Genetic Resources, pursuant to Decision No. 
391 of the Andean Community (Executive Decree No. 905 
of October 3, 2011)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/11842)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
FIRST
a genetic resource or of a product derived there-
from.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
FIRST
Prior to the granting of an intellectual 
property right, the Ecuadorian Intellectual 
Property Institute shall request the regis -
tration number of the access contract and a 
copy thereof, where there are reasonable 
indications or there is certainty that the 
products or processes whose protection is 
sought have been obtained from a genetic 
resource or a product derived therefrom, 
in accordance with the Constitution and the 
applicable law.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
FIRST
Prior to the granting of an intellectual property 
right, the Ecuadorian Intellectual Property Institute 
shall request the registration number of the 
access contract and copy thereof, where there 
are reasonable indications or there is certainty 
that the products or processes whose protection 
is requested have been obtained from a genetic 
resource or a product derived therefrom, in accor-
dance with the Constitution and the applicable law.
Organic Code on the Social Economy of Knowledge, 
Creativity and Innovation (of December 9, 2016)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/16990)
Article 282.- Patent and disclosure of 
origin.-
In accordance with the provisions of inter -
national treaties to which Ecuador is a party, 
this Code and the Regulations thereto, the 
applicant filing for a patent involving the 
use of genetic resources and associated 
traditional knowledge shall name:
1. the country in which those resources or 
associated traditional knowledge have been 
obtained; and
2. the source, including details on the body, 
where appropriate, from which those resources 
or associated traditional knowledge have 
been obtained.
Article 282.- Patent disclosure of origin.-
In accordance with the provisions of international 
treaties to which Ecuador is a party, this Code 
and the Regulations thereto, the applicant filing 
for a patent involving the use of genetic resources 
and associated traditional knowledge shall name:
1. the country in which those resources or 
associated traditional knowledge have been 
obtained; and,
2. the source, including details on the body, 
where appropriate, from which those resourc-
es or associated traditional knowledge have 
been obtained.
Article 303.- Absolute nullity of the patent.- 
The national intellectual property authority shall, 
ex oficio or at the request of any person with a 
proven legitimate interest and at any time, rule that 
a patent is null and void in the following cases:
[…]
7. ascertained non-inclusion in the patent appli-
cation of a copy of the contract granting access 
to products or processes obtained or developed 
from genetic resources or related by-products 
originating in Ecuador;
8. ascertained non-inclusion in the application of 
the copy of the document attesting to the licens-
ing or authorization of the use of the traditional 
knowledge of indigenous, Afro-American or local 
communities of Ecuador or Andean Community 
Member States in respect of protected goods or 
processes obtained or developed on the basis of 
said knowledge of which Ecuador or any Andean 
Community Member State is the country of origin;

69
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Djibouti Law No. 50/AN/09/6th Lof July 19, 2009, on the Protection 
of Industrial Property
https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/6124
Article 34
genetic or biological resources, traditional 
knowledge 
Article 34
The description of the invention shall disclose 
the invention in a way that is sufficiently clear 
and complete to enable a person skilled in the 
art to carry it out. In particular, the description 
of the invention shall:
[…]
(b) indicate the background art which, as far 
as known to the applicant, can be regarded as 
useful for understanding the invention and the 
searching and examination of the invention in 
the event of a dispute, and, preferably, cite the 
documents reflecting such art. If the invention 
claimed has been developed or obtained 
directly from genetic or biological resourc-
es obtained from a particular source, or 
from the use of traditional knowledge 
obtained from a particular community, the 
description shall indicate the source of these 
resources or knowledge, as well as the way 
in which they have been obtained;
Article 34
The description of the invention shall disclose 
the invention in a way that is sufficiently clear 
and complete to enable a person skilled in the 
art to carry it out. In particular, the description 
of the invention shall:
[…]
(b) indicate the background art which, as far 
as known to the applicant, can be regarded as 
useful for understanding the invention and the 
searching and examination of the invention in 
the event of a dispute, and, preferably, cite the 
documents reflecting such art. If the invention 
claimed has been developed or obtained directly 
from genetic or biological resources obtained from 
a particular source, or from the use of traditional 
knowledge obtained from a particular community, 
the description shall indicate the source of 
these resources or knowledge, as well as 
the way in which they have been obtained;
Article 41
A patent application shall be refused if:
[…]
(g) its description or claims clearly do not 
meet the conditions provided for in Articles 
34 and 35, particularly where claims are not 
based on the description;
[…]
Ecuador National Regulations of the Common Regime Governing 
Access to Genetic Resources, pursuant to Decision No. 
391 of the Andean Community (Executive Decree No. 905 
of October 3, 2011)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/11842)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
FIRST
a genetic resource or of a product derived there-
from.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
FIRST
Prior to the granting of an intellectual 
property right, the Ecuadorian Intellectual 
Property Institute shall request the regis -
tration number of the access contract and a 
copy thereof, where there are reasonable 
indications or there is certainty that the 
products or processes whose protection is 
sought have been obtained from a genetic 
resource or a product derived therefrom, 
in accordance with the Constitution and the 
applicable law.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
FIRST
Prior to the granting of an intellectual property 
right, the Ecuadorian Intellectual Property Institute 
shall request the registration number of the 
access contract and copy thereof, where there 
are reasonable indications or there is certainty 
that the products or processes whose protection 
is requested have been obtained from a genetic 
resource or a product derived therefrom, in accor-
dance with the Constitution and the applicable law.
Organic Code on the Social Economy of Knowledge, 
Creativity and Innovation (of December 9, 2016)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/16990)
Article 282.- Patent and disclosure of 
origin.-
In accordance with the provisions of inter -
national treaties to which Ecuador is a party, 
this Code and the Regulations thereto, the 
applicant filing for a patent involving the 
use of genetic resources and associated 
traditional knowledge shall name:
1. the country in which those resources or 
associated traditional knowledge have been 
obtained; and
2. the source, including details on the body, 
where appropriate, from which those resources 
or associated traditional knowledge have 
been obtained.
Article 282.- Patent disclosure of origin.-
In accordance with the provisions of international 
treaties to which Ecuador is a party, this Code 
and the Regulations thereto, the applicant filing 
for a patent involving the use of genetic resources 
and associated traditional knowledge shall name:
1. the country in which those resources or 
associated traditional knowledge have been 
obtained; and,
2. the source, including details on the body, 
where appropriate, from which those resourc-
es or associated traditional knowledge have 
been obtained.
Article 303.- Absolute nullity of the patent.- 
The national intellectual property authority shall, 
ex oficio or at the request of any person with a 
proven legitimate interest and at any time, rule that 
a patent is null and void in the following cases:
[…]
7. ascertained non-inclusion in the patent appli-
cation of a copy of the contract granting access 
to products or processes obtained or developed 
from genetic resources or related by-products 
originating in Ecuador;
8. ascertained non-inclusion in the application of 
the copy of the document attesting to the licens-
ing or authorization of the use of the traditional 
knowledge of indigenous, Afro-American or local 
communities of Ecuador or Andean Community 
Member States in respect of protected goods or 
processes obtained or developed on the basis of 
said knowledge of which Ecuador or any Andean 
Community Member State is the country of origin;

70
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Furthermore, the applicant must attach a copy 
of an internationally recognized certificate 
of compliance with legislation on access to 
genetic resources or associated traditional 
knowledge. If an internationally recognized 
certificate of compliance is not applicable 
in the source country, the applicant shall 
provide relevant information on compliance 
with prior informed consent, and access to 
and fair and equitable sharing of benefits, 
as required by the domestic legislation of 
the country providing the genetic resources 
and/or associated traditional knowledge, be 
it the country of origin of said resources or 
a country that has acquired the genetic re -
sources or associated traditional knowledge in 
accordance with the Convention on Biological 
Diversity and other international treaties to 
which Ecuador is a party.
Furthermore, the applicant must attach a copy 
of an internationally recognized certificate 
of compliance with legislation on access to 
genetic resources or associated traditional 
knowledge . If an internationally recognized 
certificate of compliance is not applicable in 
the source country, the applicant shall provide 
relevant information on compliance with prior 
informed consent, and access to and fair and 
equitable sharing of benefits, as required by 
the domestic legislation of the country provid-
ing the genetic resources and/or associated 
traditional knowledge, be it the country of 
origin of said resources or a country that has 
acquired the genetic resources or associated 
traditional knowledge in accordance with 
the Convention on Biological Diversity and 
other international treaties to which Ecuador 
is a party.
9. patent granted in contravention of Article 282.
Should the above-listed grounds apply to only one 
of the claims or to parts of a claim, only those 
claims or only those parts of the claim shall be 
ruled null and void, as appropriate.
The patent, the claim or the part of a claim that 
has been ruled null and void shall be deemed 
null and void and without any effect as from the 
patent application filing date.
Egypt Law No. 82 of 2002 on the Protection of Intellectual 
Property Rights
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=1301)
Article 13
biological, plant or animal product, or traditional 
medicinal, agricultural, industrial or handicraft 
knowledge, cultural or environmental heritage
Article 13
[…]
Where the invention involves biological, 
plant or animal product, or traditional 
medicinal, agricultural, industrial or handi-
craft knowledge, cultural or environmental 
heritage, the inventor should have acquired 
the sources in a legitimate manner.
[…] 
Article 13
[…]
Where the invention involves biological, plant or 
animal product, or traditional medicinal, agricultur-
al, industrial or handicraft knowledge, cultural or 
environmental heritage, the inventor should have 
acquired the sources in a legitimate manner.
[…]
Article 14
The Patent Office may, as stipulated in the 
Regulations, require the applicant to make any
amendments or complements which it shall deem 
necessary to comply with the provisions of Article
13. If the applicant fails to comply within three 
months of notification, he shall be considered 
as having withdrawn his application.
The applicant may, within 30 days and in ac -
cordance with the conditions stipulated in the
Regulations, appeal such request by the Patent 
Office before the Committee provided for in article
36. 
Council of Ministers Resolution No. 1366 of 2003 issuing 
Implementing Regulations for Law No. 82 of 2002 on the 
Protection of Intellectual Property Rights, Books One, 
Two and Four
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=7299)
Article 3
[…] plant or animal biological material, traditional 
medicinal, agricultural, industrial or handicraft 
knowledge, or cultural or environmental heritage
Article 3
The patent application shall be accom -
panied by
[…]
3. Where the application relates to an 
invention or utility model involving plant 
or animal biological material, traditional 
medicinal, agricultural, industrial or hand-
icraft knowledge, or cultural or environ-
mental heritage, it shall be accompanied 
by documentation proving that the inventor 
has accessed the source from which the 
material was obtained in a legitimate manner, 
according to the legislation applicable in the 
Arab Republic of Egypt.
Article 3
The patent application shall be accompanied by
[…]
3. Where the application relates to an invention 
or utility model involving plant or animal biolog-
ical material, traditional medicinal, agricultural, 
industrial or handicraft knowledge, or cultural or 
environmental heritage, it shall be accompanied 
by documentation proving that the inventor 
has accessed the source from which the 
material was obtained in a legitimate manner, 
according to the legislation applicable in the 
Arab Republic of Egypt.
Article 4. Documentation mentioned under items 
3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of Article 3 of these Regulations 
may be furnished within four months from the 
filing date of the application.
[…]
If the documents provided for by the first 
paragraph are not furnished in due time, as 
the case may be, the application shall be 
considered as non-existent.
Ethiopia Access to Genetic Resources and Community Knowledge, 
and Community Rights Proclamation No. 482/2006
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/5559)
Article 17.
genetic resources, community knowledge
Article 17. Obligations of Access Permit 
Holder
A person who shall be given an access permit 
shall have the following obligations:
[…]
12/ where he seeks to acquire intellectual 
property right over the genetic resources 
accessed or parts thereof, negotiate new 
agreement with the Institute based on the 
relevant laws of Ethiopia;
13/ not apply for a patent or any other intellec-
tual property protection over the community 
knowledge accessed without first obtaining 
explicit written consent from the Institute;
Article 17. Obligations of Access Permit Holder
A person who shall be given an access permit 
shall have the following obligations:
[…]
12/ where he seeks to acquire intellectual property
right over the genetic resources accessed or 
parts thereof, negotiate new agreement with 
the Institute based on the relevant laws of 
Ethiopia;
13/ not apply for a patent or any other intellectual 
property protection over the community knowledge 
accessed without first obtaining explicit written 
consent from the Institute;

71
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Furthermore, the applicant must attach a copy 
of an internationally recognized certificate 
of compliance with legislation on access to 
genetic resources or associated traditional 
knowledge. If an internationally recognized 
certificate of compliance is not applicable 
in the source country, the applicant shall 
provide relevant information on compliance 
with prior informed consent, and access to 
and fair and equitable sharing of benefits, 
as required by the domestic legislation of 
the country providing the genetic resources 
and/or associated traditional knowledge, be 
it the country of origin of said resources or 
a country that has acquired the genetic re -
sources or associated traditional knowledge in 
accordance with the Convention on Biological 
Diversity and other international treaties to 
which Ecuador is a party.
Furthermore, the applicant must attach a copy 
of an internationally recognized certificate 
of compliance with legislation on access to 
genetic resources or associated traditional 
knowledge . If an internationally recognized 
certificate of compliance is not applicable in 
the source country, the applicant shall provide 
relevant information on compliance with prior 
informed consent, and access to and fair and 
equitable sharing of benefits, as required by 
the domestic legislation of the country provid-
ing the genetic resources and/or associated 
traditional knowledge, be it the country of 
origin of said resources or a country that has 
acquired the genetic resources or associated 
traditional knowledge in accordance with 
the Convention on Biological Diversity and 
other international treaties to which Ecuador 
is a party.
9. patent granted in contravention of Article 282.
Should the above-listed grounds apply to only one 
of the claims or to parts of a claim, only those 
claims or only those parts of the claim shall be 
ruled null and void, as appropriate.
The patent, the claim or the part of a claim that 
has been ruled null and void shall be deemed 
null and void and without any effect as from the 
patent application filing date.
Egypt Law No. 82 of 2002 on the Protection of Intellectual 
Property Rights
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=1301)
Article 13
biological, plant or animal product, or traditional 
medicinal, agricultural, industrial or handicraft 
knowledge, cultural or environmental heritage
Article 13
[…]
Where the invention involves biological, 
plant or animal product, or traditional 
medicinal, agricultural, industrial or handi-
craft knowledge, cultural or environmental 
heritage, the inventor should have acquired 
the sources in a legitimate manner.
[…] 
Article 13
[…]
Where the invention involves biological, plant or 
animal product, or traditional medicinal, agricultur-
al, industrial or handicraft knowledge, cultural or 
environmental heritage, the inventor should have 
acquired the sources in a legitimate manner.
[…]
Article 14
The Patent Office may, as stipulated in the 
Regulations, require the applicant to make any
amendments or complements which it shall deem 
necessary to comply with the provisions of Article
13. If the applicant fails to comply within three 
months of notification, he shall be considered 
as having withdrawn his application.
The applicant may, within 30 days and in ac -
cordance with the conditions stipulated in the
Regulations, appeal such request by the Patent 
Office before the Committee provided for in article
36. 
Council of Ministers Resolution No. 1366 of 2003 issuing 
Implementing Regulations for Law No. 82 of 2002 on the 
Protection of Intellectual Property Rights, Books One, 
Two and Four
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=7299)
Article 3
[…] plant or animal biological material, traditional 
medicinal, agricultural, industrial or handicraft 
knowledge, or cultural or environmental heritage
Article 3
The patent application shall be accom -
panied by
[…]
3. Where the application relates to an 
invention or utility model involving plant 
or animal biological material, traditional 
medicinal, agricultural, industrial or hand-
icraft knowledge, or cultural or environ-
mental heritage, it shall be accompanied 
by documentation proving that the inventor 
has accessed the source from which the 
material was obtained in a legitimate manner, 
according to the legislation applicable in the 
Arab Republic of Egypt.
Article 3
The patent application shall be accompanied by
[…]
3. Where the application relates to an invention 
or utility model involving plant or animal biolog-
ical material, traditional medicinal, agricultural, 
industrial or handicraft knowledge, or cultural or 
environmental heritage, it shall be accompanied 
by documentation proving that the inventor 
has accessed the source from which the 
material was obtained in a legitimate manner, 
according to the legislation applicable in the 
Arab Republic of Egypt.
Article 4. Documentation mentioned under items 
3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of Article 3 of these Regulations 
may be furnished within four months from the 
filing date of the application.
[…]
If the documents provided for by the first 
paragraph are not furnished in due time, as 
the case may be, the application shall be 
considered as non-existent.
Ethiopia Access to Genetic Resources and Community Knowledge, 
and Community Rights Proclamation No. 482/2006
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/5559)
Article 17.
genetic resources, community knowledge
Article 17. Obligations of Access Permit 
Holder
A person who shall be given an access permit 
shall have the following obligations:
[…]
12/ where he seeks to acquire intellectual 
property right over the genetic resources 
accessed or parts thereof, negotiate new 
agreement with the Institute based on the 
relevant laws of Ethiopia;
13/ not apply for a patent or any other intellec-
tual property protection over the community 
knowledge accessed without first obtaining 
explicit written consent from the Institute;
Article 17. Obligations of Access Permit Holder
A person who shall be given an access permit 
shall have the following obligations:
[…]
12/ where he seeks to acquire intellectual property
right over the genetic resources accessed or 
parts thereof, negotiate new agreement with 
the Institute based on the relevant laws of 
Ethiopia;
13/ not apply for a patent or any other intellectual 
property protection over the community knowledge 
accessed without first obtaining explicit written 
consent from the Institute;

72
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
14/ recognize the locality where the genetic 
resource or community knowledge ac -
cessed from as origin in the application for 
commercial property protection of the product 
developed there from;
[…]
14/ recognize the locality where the genetic 
resource or community knowledge accessed from 
as origin in the application for commercial property 
protection of the product developed there from;
[…]
European Union Directive 98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 6 July 1998 on the Legal Protection of 
Biotechnological Inventions
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=1440)
(Paragraph 27 of the Preamble) biological 
material of plant or animal origin
Paragraph 27 of the Preamble. Whereas if 
an invention is based on biological mate-
rial of plant or animal origin or if it uses 
such material, the patent application should, 
where appropriate, include information on the 
geographical origin of such material, if known;
Paragraph 27 of the Preamble. Whereas if an 
invention is based on biological material of plant 
or animal origin or if it uses such material, the 
patent application should, where appropriate, 
include information on the geographical origin 
of such material, if known;
Paragraph 27 of the Preamble. Whereas if an 
invention is based on biological material of plant or 
animal origin or if it uses such material, the patent 
application should, where appropriate, include infor-
mation on the geographical origin of such material, 
if known; whereas this is without prejudice to 
the processing of patent applications or the 
validity of rights arising from granted patents.
France Law No. 2016-1087 of August 8, 2016 on the recovery of 
biodiversity, nature and landscapes
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=16565)
Art. L. 412-18.-II
Genetic resources and associated traditional 
knowledge
Art. L. 412-18.-II
Users of genetic resources and associated 
traditional knowledge shall submit to the 
competent authority or authorities referred 
to in paragraph 1 hereof the information 
stipulated in Article 4 of the above-mentioned 
EU Regulation 511/2014 of April1 6, 2014, in 
the following circumstances:
[…]
2. […] Where [the use of genetic resources 
and traditional knowledge associated with 
such genetic resources] leads to a patent 
application, the information mentioned in 
paragraph 1 hereof shall be sent to the National 
Intellectual Property Institute solely at the initia-
tive of the registrant. The National Intellectual 
Property Institute shall then perform follow 
the normal procedure for the examination of 
the patent application and issue a filing date 
and shall transmit the information without 
review to the competent authority responsi-
ble for implementing the rules issued by the 
European Union to ensure that each Member 
State verifies that a user of genetic resources 
and, as the case may be, traditional knowledge 
associated with such genetic resources, has 
accessed the resources on its territory, in 
compliance with all legislative or regulatory 
provisions, as the case may be.
[…]
Art. L. 412-18.-II
Users of genetic resources and of the associated 
traditional shall submit to the competent authority 
or authorities referred to in paragraph 1 hereof 
the information stipulated in Article 4 of EU 
Regulation 511/2014 of April 16, 2014
[…]
Article 39 
[…] The following shall be punishable by one 
year of imprisonment and a fine of 150,000 
euros: 
1. Using genetic resources or the associated 
traditional knowledge, within the meaning of 
Article L. 412.3 L. 412.4, without the docu-
ments indicated in article 4(3) of EU Regulation 
511/2014 of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of April 16, 2014, where such doc-
uments are mandatory; 
2. Failing to seek, preserve or transmit to sub-
sequent users, relevant information regarding 
access and benefit-sharing in regard to ge-
netic resources and the associated traditional 
knowledge, pursuant to Article 4.
The fine shall be increased to one mil -
lion euros where the genetic resources or 
traditional knowledge referred to in para -
graph I(1) above resulted in commercial use. 
II. Natural or legal persons guilty of violations 
under Article I above shall also incur the following 
additional penalty: prohibition for a period of 
not more than five years from requesting 
authorization to access genetic resources or 
certain categories thereof and the associated 
traditional knowledge for the purposes of 
commercial use, pursuant to articles L. 412.8 
and L. 412.9.
Germany Patent Act as published on 16 December 1980 (Federal 
Law Gazette 1981 I p. 1), as last
amended by Article 2 of the Act of 4 April 2016
(http://www.wipo.int/edocs/lexdocs/laws/en/de/de223en.
pdf)
Section 34a
Biological material of plant or animal origin 
Section 34a
(1) Where an invention is based on biological 
material of plant or animal origin or if it uses 
such material, the application should include 
information on the geographical origin of such 
material, if known.
[…]
Section 34a
(1) Where an invention is based on biological 
material of plant or animal origin or if it uses 
such material, the application should include 
information on the geographical origin of 
such material, if known.
[…]
(2) If the application includes information on 
the geographical origin pursuant to the first sen-
tence of subsection (1), the German Patent and 
Trade Mark Office shall notify this application 
to the Federal Agency for Nature Conservation 
(Bundesamt für Naturschutz) as the competent 
authority within the meaning of section 6 (1) of 
the Act Implementing the Obligations Under the 
Nagoya Protocol and Transposing Regulation (EU) 
No 511/2014 of 25 November 2015 (Federal Law 
Gazette I p. 2092) following publication of the 
information pursuant to section 32 (5).
Section 34a
(1) […] This shall be without prejudice to the 
examination of applications or the validity of 
rights arising from granted patents.
[…]

73
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
14/ recognize the locality where the genetic 
resource or community knowledge ac -
cessed from as origin in the application for 
commercial property protection of the product 
developed there from;
[…]
14/ recognize the locality where the genetic 
resource or community knowledge accessed from 
as origin in the application for commercial property 
protection of the product developed there from;
[…]
European Union Directive 98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 6 July 1998 on the Legal Protection of 
Biotechnological Inventions
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=1440)
(Paragraph 27 of the Preamble) biological 
material of plant or animal origin
Paragraph 27 of the Preamble. Whereas if 
an invention is based on biological mate-
rial of plant or animal origin or if it uses 
such material, the patent application should, 
where appropriate, include information on the 
geographical origin of such material, if known;
Paragraph 27 of the Preamble. Whereas if an 
invention is based on biological material of plant 
or animal origin or if it uses such material, the 
patent application should, where appropriate, 
include information on the geographical origin 
of such material, if known;
Paragraph 27 of the Preamble. Whereas if an 
invention is based on biological material of plant or 
animal origin or if it uses such material, the patent 
application should, where appropriate, include infor-
mation on the geographical origin of such material, 
if known; whereas this is without prejudice to 
the processing of patent applications or the 
validity of rights arising from granted patents.
France Law No. 2016-1087 of August 8, 2016 on the recovery of 
biodiversity, nature and landscapes
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=16565)
Art. L. 412-18.-II
Genetic resources and associated traditional 
knowledge
Art. L. 412-18.-II
Users of genetic resources and associated 
traditional knowledge shall submit to the 
competent authority or authorities referred 
to in paragraph 1 hereof the information 
stipulated in Article 4 of the above-mentioned 
EU Regulation 511/2014 of April1 6, 2014, in 
the following circumstances:
[…]
2. […] Where [the use of genetic resources 
and traditional knowledge associated with 
such genetic resources] leads to a patent 
application, the information mentioned in 
paragraph 1 hereof shall be sent to the National 
Intellectual Property Institute solely at the initia-
tive of the registrant. The National Intellectual 
Property Institute shall then perform follow 
the normal procedure for the examination of 
the patent application and issue a filing date 
and shall transmit the information without 
review to the competent authority responsi-
ble for implementing the rules issued by the 
European Union to ensure that each Member 
State verifies that a user of genetic resources 
and, as the case may be, traditional knowledge 
associated with such genetic resources, has 
accessed the resources on its territory, in 
compliance with all legislative or regulatory 
provisions, as the case may be.
[…]
Art. L. 412-18.-II
Users of genetic resources and of the associated 
traditional shall submit to the competent authority 
or authorities referred to in paragraph 1 hereof 
the information stipulated in Article 4 of EU 
Regulation 511/2014 of April 16, 2014
[…]
Article 39 
[…] The following shall be punishable by one 
year of imprisonment and a fine of 150,000 
euros: 
1. Using genetic resources or the associated 
traditional knowledge, within the meaning of 
Article L. 412.3 L. 412.4, without the docu-
ments indicated in article 4(3) of EU Regulation 
511/2014 of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of April 16, 2014, where such doc-
uments are mandatory; 
2. Failing to seek, preserve or transmit to sub-
sequent users, relevant information regarding 
access and benefit-sharing in regard to ge-
netic resources and the associated traditional 
knowledge, pursuant to Article 4.
The fine shall be increased to one mil -
lion euros where the genetic resources or 
traditional knowledge referred to in para -
graph I(1) above resulted in commercial use. 
II. Natural or legal persons guilty of violations 
under Article I above shall also incur the following 
additional penalty: prohibition for a period of 
not more than five years from requesting 
authorization to access genetic resources or 
certain categories thereof and the associated 
traditional knowledge for the purposes of 
commercial use, pursuant to articles L. 412.8 
and L. 412.9.
Germany Patent Act as published on 16 December 1980 (Federal 
Law Gazette 1981 I p. 1), as last
amended by Article 2 of the Act of 4 April 2016
(http://www.wipo.int/edocs/lexdocs/laws/en/de/de223en.
pdf)
Section 34a
Biological material of plant or animal origin 
Section 34a
(1) Where an invention is based on biological 
material of plant or animal origin or if it uses 
such material, the application should include 
information on the geographical origin of such 
material, if known.
[…]
Section 34a
(1) Where an invention is based on biological 
material of plant or animal origin or if it uses 
such material, the application should include 
information on the geographical origin of 
such material, if known.
[…]
(2) If the application includes information on 
the geographical origin pursuant to the first sen-
tence of subsection (1), the German Patent and 
Trade Mark Office shall notify this application 
to the Federal Agency for Nature Conservation 
(Bundesamt für Naturschutz) as the competent 
authority within the meaning of section 6 (1) of 
the Act Implementing the Obligations Under the 
Nagoya Protocol and Transposing Regulation (EU) 
No 511/2014 of 25 November 2015 (Federal Law 
Gazette I p. 2092) following publication of the 
information pursuant to section 32 (5).
Section 34a
(1) […] This shall be without prejudice to the 
examination of applications or the validity of 
rights arising from granted patents.
[…]

74
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
India The Patents Act, 1970 (as amended up to Patents 
(Amendment) Act, 2005)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=13104)
Article 10(4)(ii)(D)
Biological material
Article 10(4)(ii)(D)
(ii) If the applicant mentions a biological ma-
terial in the specification which may not be 
described in such a way as to satisfy clauses 
(a) and (b), and if such material is not avail-
able to the public, the application shall be 
completed by depositing the material to an 
international depository authority under the 
Budapest Treaty and by fulfilling the following 
conditions, namely:—
[…]
(D) disclose the source and geographical origin 
of the biological material in the specification, 
when used in an invention.
Article 10(4)(ii)(D)
(ii) If the applicant mentions a biological material 
in the specification which may not be described in 
such a way as to satisfy clauses (a) and (b), and 
if such material is not available to the public, the 
application shall be completed by depositing the 
material to an international depository authority 
under the Budapest Treaty and by fulfilling the 
following conditions, namely:—
[…]
(D) disclose the source and geographical origin 
of the biological material in the specification, 
when used in an invention.
Article 25 Opposition to the patent. —
(1) Where an application for a patent has been 
published but a patent has not been granted, 
any person may, in writing, represent by way of 
opposition to the Controller against the grant 
of patent on the ground
[…]
(j) that the complete specification does not disclose 
or wrongly mentions the source or geographical 
origin of biological material used for the invention;
[…]
but on no other ground, and the Controller shall, 
if requested by such person for being heard, 
hear him and dispose of such representation 
in such manner and within such period as may 
be prescribed.
(2) At any time after the grant of patent but before 
the expiry of a period of one year from the date 
of publication of grant of a patent, any person 
interested may give notice of opposition to the 
Controller in the prescribed manner on any of the 
following grounds, namely: —
[…]
(j) that the complete specification does not 
disclose or wrongly mentions the source and 
geographical origin of biological material used 
for the invention; […].
Article 64 Revocation of patents.
(1) Subject to the provisions contained in this 
Act, a patent, whether granted before or after 
the commencement of this Act, may, be revoked 
on a petition of any person interested or of the 
Central Government by the Appellate Board or on 
a counter-claim in a suit for infringement of the 
patent by the High Court on any of the following 
grounds , that is to say—
[…]
(p) that the complete specification does not 
disclose or wrongly mentions the source or 
geographical origin of biological material used 
for the invention;
[…]
Indonesia Law of the Republic of Indonesia No. 13 of July 28, 2016, 
on Patents
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=16392)
Article 26
Genetic resources and/or traditional knowledge
Article 26
(1) If an invention as being associated 
with and/or derived from a genetic re -
source and/ or traditional knowledge , 
it is mandatory to disclose the origin of the 
genetic resource and/or traditional knowledge 
in question in a clear and true manner in its 
patent description.
(2) Information about a genetic resource and/ 
or traditional knowledge mentioned in sub 
article (1) is endorsed by a competent authority 
authorized by the government.
(3) Benefit sharing and/or access for the 
utilization of a genetic resource and/or tradi-
tional knowledge substantiated in sub article 
(1) is conducted based on national laws and 
international laws in the realm of genetic 
resources and traditional knowledge.
Article 26
(1) If an invention as being associated with and/or 
derived from a genetic resource and/ or traditional 
knowledge, it is mandatory to disclose the origin 
of the genetic resource and/or traditional 
knowledge in question in a clear and true 
manner in its patent description.
(2) Information about a genetic resource and/ or 
traditional knowledge mentioned in sub article (1) 
is endorsed by a competent authority authorized 
by the government.
(3) Benefit sharing and/or access for the utilization 
of a genetic resource and/or traditional knowledge 
substantiated in sub article (1) is conducted based 
on national laws and international laws in the realm 
of genetic resources and traditional knowledge.

75
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
India The Patents Act, 1970 (as amended up to Patents 
(Amendment) Act, 2005)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=13104)
Article 10(4)(ii)(D)
Biological material
Article 10(4)(ii)(D)
(ii) If the applicant mentions a biological ma-
terial in the specification which may not be 
described in such a way as to satisfy clauses 
(a) and (b), and if such material is not avail-
able to the public, the application shall be 
completed by depositing the material to an 
international depository authority under the 
Budapest Treaty and by fulfilling the following 
conditions, namely:—
[…]
(D) disclose the source and geographical origin 
of the biological material in the specification, 
when used in an invention.
Article 10(4)(ii)(D)
(ii) If the applicant mentions a biological material 
in the specification which may not be described in 
such a way as to satisfy clauses (a) and (b), and 
if such material is not available to the public, the 
application shall be completed by depositing the 
material to an international depository authority 
under the Budapest Treaty and by fulfilling the 
following conditions, namely:—
[…]
(D) disclose the source and geographical origin 
of the biological material in the specification, 
when used in an invention.
Article 25 Opposition to the patent. —
(1) Where an application for a patent has been 
published but a patent has not been granted, 
any person may, in writing, represent by way of 
opposition to the Controller against the grant 
of patent on the ground
[…]
(j) that the complete specification does not disclose 
or wrongly mentions the source or geographical 
origin of biological material used for the invention;
[…]
but on no other ground, and the Controller shall, 
if requested by such person for being heard, 
hear him and dispose of such representation 
in such manner and within such period as may 
be prescribed.
(2) At any time after the grant of patent but before 
the expiry of a period of one year from the date 
of publication of grant of a patent, any person 
interested may give notice of opposition to the 
Controller in the prescribed manner on any of the 
following grounds, namely: —
[…]
(j) that the complete specification does not 
disclose or wrongly mentions the source and 
geographical origin of biological material used 
for the invention; […].
Article 64 Revocation of patents.
(1) Subject to the provisions contained in this 
Act, a patent, whether granted before or after 
the commencement of this Act, may, be revoked 
on a petition of any person interested or of the 
Central Government by the Appellate Board or on 
a counter-claim in a suit for infringement of the 
patent by the High Court on any of the following 
grounds , that is to say—
[…]
(p) that the complete specification does not 
disclose or wrongly mentions the source or 
geographical origin of biological material used 
for the invention;
[…]
Indonesia Law of the Republic of Indonesia No. 13 of July 28, 2016, 
on Patents
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=16392)
Article 26
Genetic resources and/or traditional knowledge
Article 26
(1) If an invention as being associated 
with and/or derived from a genetic re -
source and/ or traditional knowledge , 
it is mandatory to disclose the origin of the 
genetic resource and/or traditional knowledge 
in question in a clear and true manner in its 
patent description.
(2) Information about a genetic resource and/ 
or traditional knowledge mentioned in sub 
article (1) is endorsed by a competent authority 
authorized by the government.
(3) Benefit sharing and/or access for the 
utilization of a genetic resource and/or tradi-
tional knowledge substantiated in sub article 
(1) is conducted based on national laws and 
international laws in the realm of genetic 
resources and traditional knowledge.
Article 26
(1) If an invention as being associated with and/or 
derived from a genetic resource and/ or traditional 
knowledge, it is mandatory to disclose the origin 
of the genetic resource and/or traditional 
knowledge in question in a clear and true 
manner in its patent description.
(2) Information about a genetic resource and/ or 
traditional knowledge mentioned in sub article (1) 
is endorsed by a competent authority authorized 
by the government.
(3) Benefit sharing and/or access for the utilization 
of a genetic resource and/or traditional knowledge 
substantiated in sub article (1) is conducted based 
on national laws and international laws in the realm 
of genetic resources and traditional knowledge.

76
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Italy Industrial Property Code (Legislative Decree No. 30 of 
February 10, 2005, as amended up to Decree-Law No. 1 
of January 24, 2012, converted into law with changes by 
Law No. 27 of March 24, 2012)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=13123)
Article 170 bis.
biological material of animal or plant origin
Article 170 bis. Requirements concerning 
biotechnological inventions
[...]
2. The provenance of biological material 
of animal or plant origin, which is the basis 
of the invention, is to be declared together 
with the application of the patent both with 
reference to the country of origin, in order 
to verify compliance with import and export 
legislation, and in relation to the biological 
organism from which it was isolated.
[…]. 
Article 170 bis. Requirements concerning 
biotechnological inventions
[…]
2. The provenance of biological material of animal 
or plant origin, which is the basis of the invention, 
is to be declared together with the application of 
the patent both with reference to the country of 
origin, in order to verify compliance with import 
and export legislation, and in relation to the 
biological organism from which it was isolated.
[…] 
Article 170 bis. Requirements concerning 
biotechnological inventions
[…]
7. If the Italian Patent and Trademark Office 
ascertains the lack of the conditions for patenting 
a biotechnological invention or the failure to file 
the declarations under paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, 
shall proceed in accordance with Article 173, 
paragraph 7, and in the event it determines the 
absence of the conditions for patenting as set forth 
by Articles 81-quater, 81-quinquies and Article 
162, it shall reject the application. [Article added 
by paragraph 1 of Article 87, Legislative Decree 
No. 131 of 13 August 2010.]
Art. 170-ter. Sanctions
[…]
2. Unless the action constitutes a crime, whoever, 
in the declaration required by Article 170-bis, 
paragraph 2, makes false statements concerning 
the provenance of biological material of animal or 
plant origin, shall be punished with an administra-
tive fine from 10.000,00 to 100.000,00 Euros.
[…]
4. Within the minimum and maximum limits 
established by this article, the amount of the 
administrative fines shall be determined taking 
account the criteria set forth by Article 11 of 
Law No. 689 of 24 November 1981, the different 
potential for causing harm to the protected interest 
that each violation has in the abstract, the specific 
personal qualities and the property advantage 
that the violation can bring to the guilty party or 
the person or entity in whose interest he acts.
[…]
Article 173. Observations
7. Before rejecting in full or in part an application 
or a related request, for reasons that were not set 
forth in observations pursuant to paragraph 1, 
the Italian Patent and Trademark Office assigns 
the applicant a term of two months to submit 
observations. Once that term has expired, if 
no observations have been submitted or if the 
Office does not believe that it can accept those 
submitted, the application or request is rejected 
in full or in part. 
Kyrgyzstan Law of the Kyrgyz Republic No. 116 of July 31, 2007, on 
the Protection of Traditional Knowledge
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=5571)
Traditional knowledge Article 8. Patenting of subject-matters cre-
ated on the base of Traditional Knowledge
[…]
When patenting the subject-matters cre-
ated on the base of Traditional Knowledge, 
materials of the application must contain reveal 
of origin of Traditional Knowledge which is 
used as prior art or prototype. The applicant 
shall indicate the source of making Traditional 
Knowledge available to the public.
[…]
Article 8. Patenting of subject-matters created 
on the base of Traditional Knowledge
[…]
When patenting the subject-matters created on 
the base of Traditional Knowledge, materials of 
the application must contain reveal of origin of 
Traditional Knowledge which is used as prior 
art or prototype. The applicant shall indicate the 
source of making Traditional Knowledge available 
to the public.
[…]
Article 9. Application for registration and 
granting the right to use Traditional Knowledge 
or for granting the right to use registered 
Traditional Knowledge
[…]

77
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Italy Industrial Property Code (Legislative Decree No. 30 of 
February 10, 2005, as amended up to Decree-Law No. 1 
of January 24, 2012, converted into law with changes by 
Law No. 27 of March 24, 2012)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=13123)
Article 170 bis.
biological material of animal or plant origin
Article 170 bis. Requirements concerning 
biotechnological inventions
[...]
2. The provenance of biological material 
of animal or plant origin, which is the basis 
of the invention, is to be declared together 
with the application of the patent both with 
reference to the country of origin, in order 
to verify compliance with import and export 
legislation, and in relation to the biological 
organism from which it was isolated.
[…]. 
Article 170 bis. Requirements concerning 
biotechnological inventions
[…]
2. The provenance of biological material of animal 
or plant origin, which is the basis of the invention, 
is to be declared together with the application of 
the patent both with reference to the country of 
origin, in order to verify compliance with import 
and export legislation, and in relation to the 
biological organism from which it was isolated.
[…] 
Article 170 bis. Requirements concerning 
biotechnological inventions
[…]
7. If the Italian Patent and Trademark Office 
ascertains the lack of the conditions for patenting 
a biotechnological invention or the failure to file 
the declarations under paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, 
shall proceed in accordance with Article 173, 
paragraph 7, and in the event it determines the 
absence of the conditions for patenting as set forth 
by Articles 81-quater, 81-quinquies and Article 
162, it shall reject the application. [Article added 
by paragraph 1 of Article 87, Legislative Decree 
No. 131 of 13 August 2010.]
Art. 170-ter. Sanctions
[…]
2. Unless the action constitutes a crime, whoever, 
in the declaration required by Article 170-bis, 
paragraph 2, makes false statements concerning 
the provenance of biological material of animal or 
plant origin, shall be punished with an administra-
tive fine from 10.000,00 to 100.000,00 Euros.
[…]
4. Within the minimum and maximum limits 
established by this article, the amount of the 
administrative fines shall be determined taking 
account the criteria set forth by Article 11 of 
Law No. 689 of 24 November 1981, the different 
potential for causing harm to the protected interest 
that each violation has in the abstract, the specific 
personal qualities and the property advantage 
that the violation can bring to the guilty party or 
the person or entity in whose interest he acts.
[…]
Article 173. Observations
7. Before rejecting in full or in part an application 
or a related request, for reasons that were not set 
forth in observations pursuant to paragraph 1, 
the Italian Patent and Trademark Office assigns 
the applicant a term of two months to submit 
observations. Once that term has expired, if 
no observations have been submitted or if the 
Office does not believe that it can accept those 
submitted, the application or request is rejected 
in full or in part. 
Kyrgyzstan Law of the Kyrgyz Republic No. 116 of July 31, 2007, on 
the Protection of Traditional Knowledge
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=5571)
Traditional knowledge Article 8. Patenting of subject-matters cre-
ated on the base of Traditional Knowledge
[…]
When patenting the subject-matters cre-
ated on the base of Traditional Knowledge, 
materials of the application must contain reveal 
of origin of Traditional Knowledge which is 
used as prior art or prototype. The applicant 
shall indicate the source of making Traditional 
Knowledge available to the public.
[…]
Article 8. Patenting of subject-matters created 
on the base of Traditional Knowledge
[…]
When patenting the subject-matters created on 
the base of Traditional Knowledge, materials of 
the application must contain reveal of origin of 
Traditional Knowledge which is used as prior 
art or prototype. The applicant shall indicate the 
source of making Traditional Knowledge available 
to the public.
[…]
Article 9. Application for registration and 
granting the right to use Traditional Knowledge 
or for granting the right to use registered 
Traditional Knowledge
[…]

78
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
An application shall contain the following:
1) application for traditional knowledge 
registration and granting the right to use 
Traditional Knowledge or granting the right to 
use registered Traditional Knowledge stating 
the applicant as well as his location and place 
of residence;
2) specific and complete description of 
Traditional Knowledge, including: point of 
origin of Traditional Knowledge (borders of 
a geographic object); description of genetic 
resource, which is being used in connection 
with particular traditional knowledge; field 
of application and expected positive result 
of traditional knowledge used; information 
relevant to previously issued publications 
regarding a particular traditional knowledge.
The following documents shall be attached to 
the application:
1) An official document granted by the competent 
authority confirming a practical applicability of 
Traditional Knowledge and positive result of use 
thereof in appropriate field of activity.
2) Conclusion of the competent body (bodies) 
confirming membership of the applicant in a local 
community and/or is located in geographic object 
for which Traditional Knowledge is pertained to.
In case of filing the application for registration of 
Traditional Knowledge by State bodies, the said 
conclusion shall not be required.
3) For foreign applicant a document confirm-
ing his/her right for the claimed Traditional 
Knowledge in the country of origin.
[…]
Namibia Industrial Property Act, 2012 (Act No. 1 of 2012)
https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/16331
Application for a patent
Section 24 (2)
biological resources or associated indigenous or 
traditional knowledge
Application for a patent
Section 24 (2) Where the subject matter 
of a patent application is derived from 
or developed with biological resources 
or associated indigenous or traditional 
knowledge, the applicant must disclose in 
the application for a patent the country pro-
viding the resources or associated indigenous 
or traditional knowledge, from whom in the 
providing country they were obtained, and, as 
known after reasonable inquiry, the country 
of origin and any other information regarding 
the source or nature of the resources as may 
be prescribed.
Application for a patent
Section 24 (2) Where the subject matter of a 
patent application is derived from or developed 
with biological resources or associated indigenous 
or traditional knowledge, the applicant must 
disclose in the application for a patent the 
country providing the resources or associated 
indigenous or traditional knowledge, from 
whom in the providing country they were 
obtained, and, as known after reasonable 
inquiry, the country of origin and any other 
information regarding the source or nature of 
the resources as may be prescribed.
Invalidation of patent
Section 65
[…]
(3) Subject to section 67, the Tribunal must 
invalidate the patent if the person requesting the 
invalidation proves that any one of the following 
grounds for invalidation applies to the patent, 
namely –
[…]
(e) that any of the requirements of sections […] 
24 […] has not been complied with
Norway Patents Act (Act No. 9 of December 15, 1967) (consolidated 
version of 2016)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=15925)
(Official English version available at https://www.patent-
styret.no/en/norwegian-patents-act)
2018 version also available in WIPO Lex:
https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/17711
Chapter 2
Section 8b.
Biological material and traditional knowledge
Chapter 2
Section 8b.
If an invention concerns or uses biological 
material or traditional knowledge , the 
patent application shall include information on 
the country from which the inventor collected 
or received the material or the knowledge 
(the providing country). If it follows from 
the national law in the providing country 
that access to biological material or use of 
traditional knowledge shall be subject to prior 
consent, the application shall state whether 
such consent has been obtained.
Chapter 2
Section 8b.
If an invention concerns or uses biological material 
or traditional knowledge, the patent application 
shall include information on the country from 
which the inventor collected or received the 
material or the knowledge (the providing 
country). If it follows from the national law in 
the providing country that access to biological 
material or use of traditional knowledge shall be 
subject to prior consent, the application shall 
state whether such consent has been obtained.
Chapter 2
Section 8b.
[…]
Breach of the duty to disclose information is 
subject to penalty in accordance with the General 
Civil Penal Code § 221. The duty to disclose 
information is without prejudice to the pro-
cessing of patent applications or the validity 
of rights arising from granted patents.

79
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
An application shall contain the following:
1) application for traditional knowledge 
registration and granting the right to use 
Traditional Knowledge or granting the right to 
use registered Traditional Knowledge stating 
the applicant as well as his location and place 
of residence;
2) specific and complete description of 
Traditional Knowledge, including: point of 
origin of Traditional Knowledge (borders of 
a geographic object); description of genetic 
resource, which is being used in connection 
with particular traditional knowledge; field 
of application and expected positive result 
of traditional knowledge used; information 
relevant to previously issued publications 
regarding a particular traditional knowledge.
The following documents shall be attached to 
the application:
1) An official document granted by the competent 
authority confirming a practical applicability of 
Traditional Knowledge and positive result of use 
thereof in appropriate field of activity.
2) Conclusion of the competent body (bodies) 
confirming membership of the applicant in a local 
community and/or is located in geographic object 
for which Traditional Knowledge is pertained to.
In case of filing the application for registration of 
Traditional Knowledge by State bodies, the said 
conclusion shall not be required.
3) For foreign applicant a document confirm-
ing his/her right for the claimed Traditional 
Knowledge in the country of origin.
[…]
Namibia Industrial Property Act, 2012 (Act No. 1 of 2012)
https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/16331
Application for a patent
Section 24 (2)
biological resources or associated indigenous or 
traditional knowledge
Application for a patent
Section 24 (2) Where the subject matter 
of a patent application is derived from 
or developed with biological resources 
or associated indigenous or traditional 
knowledge, the applicant must disclose in 
the application for a patent the country pro-
viding the resources or associated indigenous 
or traditional knowledge, from whom in the 
providing country they were obtained, and, as 
known after reasonable inquiry, the country 
of origin and any other information regarding 
the source or nature of the resources as may 
be prescribed.
Application for a patent
Section 24 (2) Where the subject matter of a 
patent application is derived from or developed 
with biological resources or associated indigenous 
or traditional knowledge, the applicant must 
disclose in the application for a patent the 
country providing the resources or associated 
indigenous or traditional knowledge, from 
whom in the providing country they were 
obtained, and, as known after reasonable 
inquiry, the country of origin and any other 
information regarding the source or nature of 
the resources as may be prescribed.
Invalidation of patent
Section 65
[…]
(3) Subject to section 67, the Tribunal must 
invalidate the patent if the person requesting the 
invalidation proves that any one of the following 
grounds for invalidation applies to the patent, 
namely –
[…]
(e) that any of the requirements of sections […] 
24 […] has not been complied with
Norway Patents Act (Act No. 9 of December 15, 1967) (consolidated 
version of 2016)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=15925)
(Official English version available at https://www.patent-
styret.no/en/norwegian-patents-act)
2018 version also available in WIPO Lex:
https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/17711
Chapter 2
Section 8b.
Biological material and traditional knowledge
Chapter 2
Section 8b.
If an invention concerns or uses biological 
material or traditional knowledge , the 
patent application shall include information on 
the country from which the inventor collected 
or received the material or the knowledge 
(the providing country). If it follows from 
the national law in the providing country 
that access to biological material or use of 
traditional knowledge shall be subject to prior 
consent, the application shall state whether 
such consent has been obtained.
Chapter 2
Section 8b.
If an invention concerns or uses biological material 
or traditional knowledge, the patent application 
shall include information on the country from 
which the inventor collected or received the 
material or the knowledge (the providing 
country). If it follows from the national law in 
the providing country that access to biological 
material or use of traditional knowledge shall be 
subject to prior consent, the application shall 
state whether such consent has been obtained.
Chapter 2
Section 8b.
[…]
Breach of the duty to disclose information is 
subject to penalty in accordance with the General 
Civil Penal Code § 221. The duty to disclose 
information is without prejudice to the pro-
cessing of patent applications or the validity 
of rights arising from granted patents.

80
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
If the providing country is not the same 
as the country of origin of the biological 
material or the traditional knowledge, the 
application shall also state the country of origin.
[…]
If the national law in the country of origin 
requires that access to biological material 
or use of traditional knowledge shall be 
subject to prior consent , the application 
shall state whether such consent has been 
obtained. If the information set out in this 
subsection is not known , the applicant 
shall state that.
[…]
When the biological material is acquired 
in accordance with Art. 12 No. 2 and 3 of 
the International Treaty on Plant Genetic 
Resources for Food and Agriculture of 
November, 3, 2001 , a copy of a standard 
material transfer agreement according to 
Art 12.4 of the Treaty shall accompany the 
patent application instead of the information 
mentioned in paragraphs two and three.
[…]
If the providing country is not the same as the 
country of origin of the biological material or the 
traditional knowledge, the application shall also 
state the country of origin.
[…]
If the national law in the country of origin requires 
that access to biological material or use of tradi-
tional knowledge shall be subject to prior consent, 
the application shall state whether such consent 
has been obtained. If the information set out 
in this subsection is not known, the applicant 
shall state that.
The duty to disclose information concerning 
biological material under the first and second 
paragraphs applies even where the inventor has 
altered the structure of the received material. 
The duty to disclose information does not apply 
to biological material derived from the human 
body. When the biological material is acquired 
in accordance with Art. 12 No. 2 and 3 of the 
International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources 
for Food and Agriculture of November, 3, 2001, a 
copy of a standard material transfer agreement 
according to Art 12.4 of the Treaty shall accompany 
the patent application instead of the information 
mentioned in paragraphs two and three.
[…]
Patent Regulations (Regulations No. 1417 of December 14, 
2007, to the Norwegian Patents Act) (consolidated version 
of 2017, status as at September 1, 2017)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/18482)
Contents of the patent applications Chapter 1. National Patent Applications
Section 2. Contents of the Application
The application shall contain the following:
[…]
8. information about the providing country and 
the country of origin for biological material in 
accordance with section 8b of the Patents Act
[…]
Chapter 1. National Patent Applications
Section 2. Contents of the Application
The application shall contain the following:
[…]
8. information about the providing country and 
the country of origin for biological material 
in accordance with section 8b of the Patents Act
[…]
Peru Decision No. 486 Establishing the Common Industrial 
Property Regime (2000)
https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/18829
See Article 26 of Decision No. 486 Establishing 
the Common Industrial Property Regime (2000)
See Article 26 of Decision No. 486 Establishing 
the Common Industrial Property Regime (2000)
Legislative Decree No. 1075 on Approval of Supplementary 
Provisions of Decision No. 486 of the Andean Community 
Commission Establishing the Common Regime on Industrial 
Property (as amended by Law No. 29316)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=6541)
Article 120-A.- Non-compliance with the 
rules applicable to genetic resources and 
traditional knowledge
Non-compliance by the patent applicant with the 
contract requirement stated in Article 26(h) and 
(i) of Andean Community Commission Decision 
No. 486 and developed in Articles 20 and 21 of 
the Regulation on Access to Genetic Resources 
shall be punishable by one or more of the following 
penalties, unless the applicant withdraws from 
the patent grant procedure or satisfactorily ex-
plains that the invention does not use traditional 
knowledge or genetic resource originating in Peru:
(a) a fine of up to 1,000 UIT;
(b) compensation;
(c) fair and equitable sharing of benefits, 
including payment of royalties and/or other 
monetary or non-monetary measures;
(d) technology transfer and capacity building;
(e) use authorizations.

81
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
If the providing country is not the same 
as the country of origin of the biological 
material or the traditional knowledge, the 
application shall also state the country of origin.
[…]
If the national law in the country of origin 
requires that access to biological material 
or use of traditional knowledge shall be 
subject to prior consent , the application 
shall state whether such consent has been 
obtained. If the information set out in this 
subsection is not known , the applicant 
shall state that.
[…]
When the biological material is acquired 
in accordance with Art. 12 No. 2 and 3 of 
the International Treaty on Plant Genetic 
Resources for Food and Agriculture of 
November, 3, 2001 , a copy of a standard 
material transfer agreement according to 
Art 12.4 of the Treaty shall accompany the 
patent application instead of the information 
mentioned in paragraphs two and three.
[…]
If the providing country is not the same as the 
country of origin of the biological material or the 
traditional knowledge, the application shall also 
state the country of origin.
[…]
If the national law in the country of origin requires 
that access to biological material or use of tradi-
tional knowledge shall be subject to prior consent, 
the application shall state whether such consent 
has been obtained. If the information set out 
in this subsection is not known, the applicant 
shall state that.
The duty to disclose information concerning 
biological material under the first and second 
paragraphs applies even where the inventor has 
altered the structure of the received material. 
The duty to disclose information does not apply 
to biological material derived from the human 
body. When the biological material is acquired 
in accordance with Art. 12 No. 2 and 3 of the 
International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources 
for Food and Agriculture of November, 3, 2001, a 
copy of a standard material transfer agreement 
according to Art 12.4 of the Treaty shall accompany 
the patent application instead of the information 
mentioned in paragraphs two and three.
[…]
Patent Regulations (Regulations No. 1417 of December 14, 
2007, to the Norwegian Patents Act) (consolidated version 
of 2017, status as at September 1, 2017)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/18482)
Contents of the patent applications Chapter 1. National Patent Applications
Section 2. Contents of the Application
The application shall contain the following:
[…]
8. information about the providing country and 
the country of origin for biological material in 
accordance with section 8b of the Patents Act
[…]
Chapter 1. National Patent Applications
Section 2. Contents of the Application
The application shall contain the following:
[…]
8. information about the providing country and 
the country of origin for biological material 
in accordance with section 8b of the Patents Act
[…]
Peru Decision No. 486 Establishing the Common Industrial 
Property Regime (2000)
https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/18829
See Article 26 of Decision No. 486 Establishing 
the Common Industrial Property Regime (2000)
See Article 26 of Decision No. 486 Establishing 
the Common Industrial Property Regime (2000)
Legislative Decree No. 1075 on Approval of Supplementary 
Provisions of Decision No. 486 of the Andean Community 
Commission Establishing the Common Regime on Industrial 
Property (as amended by Law No. 29316)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=6541)
Article 120-A.- Non-compliance with the 
rules applicable to genetic resources and 
traditional knowledge
Non-compliance by the patent applicant with the 
contract requirement stated in Article 26(h) and 
(i) of Andean Community Commission Decision 
No. 486 and developed in Articles 20 and 21 of 
the Regulation on Access to Genetic Resources 
shall be punishable by one or more of the following 
penalties, unless the applicant withdraws from 
the patent grant procedure or satisfactorily ex-
plains that the invention does not use traditional 
knowledge or genetic resource originating in Peru:
(a) a fine of up to 1,000 UIT;
(b) compensation;
(c) fair and equitable sharing of benefits, 
including payment of royalties and/or other 
monetary or non-monetary measures;
(d) technology transfer and capacity building;
(e) use authorizations.

82
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
In all cases of compulsory patent licensing, 
Article 61 to Article 69 of Andean Community 
Commission Decision No. Decision 486 and 
Article 40 of the Legislative Decree relating to 
this Law shall apply. (*)
(*) Article inserted in Article 8 of Law No. 29316, 
published on January 14, 2009.
Law No. 27811 of 24 July 2002, introducing a Protection 
Regime for the Collective Knowledge of Indigenous Peoples 
derived from Biological Resources
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=3420)
Collective knowledge
Article 2(b)
“Collective knowledge” means the accumulated, 
transgenerational knowledge evolved by indigenous 
peoples and communities concerning the proper-
ties, uses and characteristics of biological diversity. 
The intangible components referred to in Decision 
391 of the Commission of the Cartagena Agreement 
include this type of collective knowledge.
COMPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
SECOND. Submission of the license contract as a 
requirement for obtaining a patent. Where a patent 
is applied for in respect of goods or processes 
produced or developed on the basis of collective 
knowledge, the applicant shall be obliged to submit 
a copy of the license contract as a prior require-
ment for the grant of the rights concerned, except 
where the collective knowledge concerned is 
in the public domain. Failure to comply with this 
obligation shall be a cause of refusal or invalidation, 
as the case may be, of the patent concerned.
COMPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
SECOND.- Submission of the license contract 
as a requirement for obtaining a patent. Where 
a patent is applied for in respect of goods 
or processes produced or developed on 
the basis of collective knowledge , the 
applicant shall be obliged to submit a copy 
of the license contract as a prior requirement 
for the grant of the rights concerned, except 
where the collective knowledge concerned 
is in the public domain.
Failure to comply with this obligation shall be 
a cause of refusal or invalidation, as the case 
may be, of the patent concerned.
COMPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
SECOND.- Submission of the license contract 
as a requirement for obtaining a patent. Where 
a patent is applied for in respect of goods or 
processes produced or developed on the basis 
of collective knowledge, the applicant shall be 
obliged to submit a copy of the license contract 
as a prior requirement for the grant of the rights 
concerned, except where the collective knowledge 
concerned is in the public domain.
Failure to comply with this obligation shall be a 
cause of refusal or invalidation, as the case may 
be, of the patent concerned.
COMPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
SECOND. Submission of the license contract 
as a requirement for obtaining a patent. Where 
a patent is applied for in respect of goods or 
processes produced or developed on the basis 
of collective knowledge, the applicant shall be 
obliged to submit a copy of the license contract 
as a prior requirement for the grant of the rights 
concerned, except where the collective knowledge 
concerned is in the public domain. Failure to 
comply with this obligation shall be a cause 
of refusal or invalidation, as the case may 
be, of the patent concerned.
Philippines Philippine Technology Transfer Act of 2009 (Republic Act 
No. 10055)
https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/9605
Article III, Sec. 8(c)
The following are the rights and responsibilities 
of the [research and development institutes 
and/or institutions] RDls that availed of 
research funds from [Government Funding 
Agencies] GFAs:
[…]
(c) Notify the GFA within a reasonable time of 
all IPR applications, licenses and assignments 
made. All applications for IP protection 
shall disclose any biodiversity and genetic 
resource, traditional knowledge, and indig-
enous knowledge, systems and practices as 
these terms are defined in Republic Act No. 
8371 or the Indigenous Peoples Rights Act 
and Republic Act No. 9.147 or The Wildlife Act
[…] 
Article III, Sec. 8(c)
The following are the rights and responsibilities of 
the [research and development institutes and/or 
institutions] RDls that availed of research funds 
from [Government Funding Agencies] GFAs:
[…]
(c) Notify the GFA within a reasonable time of all 
IPR applications, licenses and assignments made. 
All applications for IP protection shall disclose any 
biodiversity and genetic resource, tradition-
al knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, 
systems and practices as these terms are 
defined in Republic Act No. 8371 or the Indigenous 
Peoples Rights Act and Republic Act No. 9.147 
or The Wildlife Act
[…] 
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 
10055 (Joint Administrative Order No. 02-2010)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=9629)
Rule 12
[…]
Section 3
[…]
(c) […] biodiversity, genetic resources or materials 
associated traditional knowledge, and indigenous 
knowledge, systems and practices.
Rule 12
[…]
Section 3. Disclosures. Disclosure of poten-
tial IPRs and/or all biodiversity and genetic 
resource, traditional knowledge, and indige-
nous knowledge, systems and practices shall 
be governed by the following rules:
[…]
(c) With respect to biodiversity, genetic re -
sources or materials associated Traditional 
knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, sys-
tems and practices, the following provisions 
shall govern:
Rule 12
[…]
Section 3. Disclosures. Disclosure of potential 
IPRs and/or all biodiversity and genetic resource, 
traditional knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, 
systems and practices shall
be governed by the following rules:
[…]
(c) With respect to biodiversity, genetic resources 
or materials associated
Traditional knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, 
systems and practices,
the following provisions shall govern:
Rule 12
[…]
Section 3. Disclosures.
iii. Where the RDI, for reasons beyond its control, 
does not have the necessary information to fulfill 
the disclosure requirement pertaining to any biodi-
versity, genetic resources or materials, traditional 
knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, systems 
and practices, such as, for instance, where a plant 
stored in a gene bank was collected decades ago 
and no information about its source exists, the RDI 
shall submit an affidavit from its researcher/s that 
the latter do not have the necessary information or 
that the source is unknown, and state the reasons 
thereof. The GFA shall review the affidavit to 
determine if this will constitute compliance 
with the disclosure requirement under this rule.

83
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
In all cases of compulsory patent licensing, 
Article 61 to Article 69 of Andean Community 
Commission Decision No. Decision 486 and 
Article 40 of the Legislative Decree relating to 
this Law shall apply. (*)
(*) Article inserted in Article 8 of Law No. 29316, 
published on January 14, 2009.
Law No. 27811 of 24 July 2002, introducing a Protection 
Regime for the Collective Knowledge of Indigenous Peoples 
derived from Biological Resources
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=3420)
Collective knowledge
Article 2(b)
“Collective knowledge” means the accumulated, 
transgenerational knowledge evolved by indigenous 
peoples and communities concerning the proper-
ties, uses and characteristics of biological diversity. 
The intangible components referred to in Decision 
391 of the Commission of the Cartagena Agreement 
include this type of collective knowledge.
COMPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
SECOND. Submission of the license contract as a 
requirement for obtaining a patent. Where a patent 
is applied for in respect of goods or processes 
produced or developed on the basis of collective 
knowledge, the applicant shall be obliged to submit 
a copy of the license contract as a prior require-
ment for the grant of the rights concerned, except 
where the collective knowledge concerned is 
in the public domain. Failure to comply with this 
obligation shall be a cause of refusal or invalidation, 
as the case may be, of the patent concerned.
COMPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
SECOND.- Submission of the license contract 
as a requirement for obtaining a patent. Where 
a patent is applied for in respect of goods 
or processes produced or developed on 
the basis of collective knowledge , the 
applicant shall be obliged to submit a copy 
of the license contract as a prior requirement 
for the grant of the rights concerned, except 
where the collective knowledge concerned 
is in the public domain.
Failure to comply with this obligation shall be 
a cause of refusal or invalidation, as the case 
may be, of the patent concerned.
COMPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
SECOND.- Submission of the license contract 
as a requirement for obtaining a patent. Where 
a patent is applied for in respect of goods or 
processes produced or developed on the basis 
of collective knowledge, the applicant shall be 
obliged to submit a copy of the license contract 
as a prior requirement for the grant of the rights 
concerned, except where the collective knowledge 
concerned is in the public domain.
Failure to comply with this obligation shall be a 
cause of refusal or invalidation, as the case may 
be, of the patent concerned.
COMPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
SECOND. Submission of the license contract 
as a requirement for obtaining a patent. Where 
a patent is applied for in respect of goods or 
processes produced or developed on the basis 
of collective knowledge, the applicant shall be 
obliged to submit a copy of the license contract 
as a prior requirement for the grant of the rights 
concerned, except where the collective knowledge 
concerned is in the public domain. Failure to 
comply with this obligation shall be a cause 
of refusal or invalidation, as the case may 
be, of the patent concerned.
Philippines Philippine Technology Transfer Act of 2009 (Republic Act 
No. 10055)
https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/9605
Article III, Sec. 8(c)
The following are the rights and responsibilities 
of the [research and development institutes 
and/or institutions] RDls that availed of 
research funds from [Government Funding 
Agencies] GFAs:
[…]
(c) Notify the GFA within a reasonable time of 
all IPR applications, licenses and assignments 
made. All applications for IP protection 
shall disclose any biodiversity and genetic 
resource, traditional knowledge, and indig-
enous knowledge, systems and practices as 
these terms are defined in Republic Act No. 
8371 or the Indigenous Peoples Rights Act 
and Republic Act No. 9.147 or The Wildlife Act
[…] 
Article III, Sec. 8(c)
The following are the rights and responsibilities of 
the [research and development institutes and/or 
institutions] RDls that availed of research funds 
from [Government Funding Agencies] GFAs:
[…]
(c) Notify the GFA within a reasonable time of all 
IPR applications, licenses and assignments made. 
All applications for IP protection shall disclose any 
biodiversity and genetic resource, tradition-
al knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, 
systems and practices as these terms are 
defined in Republic Act No. 8371 or the Indigenous 
Peoples Rights Act and Republic Act No. 9.147 
or The Wildlife Act
[…] 
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 
10055 (Joint Administrative Order No. 02-2010)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=9629)
Rule 12
[…]
Section 3
[…]
(c) […] biodiversity, genetic resources or materials 
associated traditional knowledge, and indigenous 
knowledge, systems and practices.
Rule 12
[…]
Section 3. Disclosures. Disclosure of poten-
tial IPRs and/or all biodiversity and genetic 
resource, traditional knowledge, and indige-
nous knowledge, systems and practices shall 
be governed by the following rules:
[…]
(c) With respect to biodiversity, genetic re -
sources or materials associated Traditional 
knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, sys-
tems and practices, the following provisions 
shall govern:
Rule 12
[…]
Section 3. Disclosures. Disclosure of potential 
IPRs and/or all biodiversity and genetic resource, 
traditional knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, 
systems and practices shall
be governed by the following rules:
[…]
(c) With respect to biodiversity, genetic resources 
or materials associated
Traditional knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, 
systems and practices,
the following provisions shall govern:
Rule 12
[…]
Section 3. Disclosures.
iii. Where the RDI, for reasons beyond its control, 
does not have the necessary information to fulfill 
the disclosure requirement pertaining to any biodi-
versity, genetic resources or materials, traditional 
knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, systems 
and practices, such as, for instance, where a plant 
stored in a gene bank was collected decades ago 
and no information about its source exists, the RDI 
shall submit an affidavit from its researcher/s that 
the latter do not have the necessary information or 
that the source is unknown, and state the reasons 
thereof. The GFA shall review the affidavit to 
determine if this will constitute compliance 
with the disclosure requirement under this rule.

84
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
i. The [Research and Development Institutes] 
RDI shall provide the [Government Funding 
Agencies] GFA with a written disclosure on 
the following: (1) any biodiversity, genetic 
resources or materials, associated traditional 
knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, sys-
tems and practices utilized in or which formed 
as basis in the development of the subject 
matter contained in the IPR application; (2) 
the primary source of any biodiversity, genetic 
resources or materials, associated traditional 
knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, sys-
tems and practices utilized in or which formed 
as basis in the subject matter contained in the 
IPR application; or (3) the secondary source, 
if no information about the primary source 
is available.
ii. The disclosure requirement under this 
section shall apply when the subject matter 
contained in a national or international IPR
application is directly based on any bio-
diversity, genetic resources or materials, 
traditional knowledge, and indigenous 
knowledge, systems and practices to 
which the RDI has had access to prior to 
the filing of the IPR application. The subject 
matter contained in the IPR application must 
depend on the specific properties of, or must 
be consciously derived from, such biodiversity 
and genetic resource or materials, traditional 
knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, sys-
tems and practices.
iii. Where the RDI, for reasons beyond 
its control, does not have the necessary 
information to fulfill the disclosure re -
quirement pertaining to any biodiversity, 
genetic resources or materials, traditional 
knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, 
systems and practices, such as, for instance, 
where a plant stored in a gene bank was 
collected decades ago and no information 
about its source exists, the RDI shall submit 
an affidavit from its researcher/s that the 
latter do not have the necessary information 
or that the source is unknown, and state the 
reasons thereof. The GFA shall review the 
affidavit to determine if this will constitute 
compliance with the disclosure requirement 
under this rule.
[…]
v. A national or international IPR application 
filed by the RDI before
the appropriate IP office shall include in the 
abstract and/or description of said application 
the same disclosure on biodiversity, genetic 
resources or materials, associated tradition-
al knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, 
systems and practices utilized in or which 
formed as basis in the development of the 
subject matter contained in the said appli-
cation, notwithstanding that such disclosure 
may not be required for the grant or issuance 
of certificate of IPR registration.
i. The [Research and Development Institutes] RDI 
shall provide the [Government Funding Agencies] 
GFA with a written disclosure on the following: (1) 
any biodiversity, genetic resources or mate-
rials, associated traditional knowledge, and 
indigenous knowledge, systems and practices 
utilized in or which formed as basis in the 
development of the subject matter contained 
in the IPR application; (2) the primary source 
of any biodiversity, genetic resources or 
materials, associated traditional knowledge, 
and indigenous knowledge, systems and 
practices utilized in or which formed as basis 
in the subject matter contained in the IPR 
application; or (3) the secondary source, if no 
information about the primary source is available.
[…]
iii. Where the RDI, for reasons beyond its control, 
does not have the necessary information to fulfill 
the disclosure requirement pertaining to any 
biodiversity, genetic resources or materials, 
traditional knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, 
systems and practices, such as, for instance, 
where a plant stored in a gene bank was collected 
decades ago and no information about its source 
exists, the RDI shall submit an affidavit from 
its researcher/s that the latter do not have 
the necessary information or that the source 
is unknown, and state the reasons thereof . 
The GFA shall review the affidavit to determine if 
this will constitute compliance with the disclosure 
requirement under this rule.
[…]
v. A national or international IPR application filed 
by the RDI before the appropriate IP office shall 
include in the abstract and/or description of said 
application the same disclosure on biodiversity, 
genetic resources or materials, associat -
ed traditional knowledge, and indigenous 
knowledge, systems and practices utilized in 
or which formed as basis in the development 
of the subject matter contained in the said 
application, notwithstanding that such disclosure 
may not be required for the grant or issuance of 
certificate of IPR registration.
[…]
v. A national or international IPR application filed 
by the RDI before the appropriate IP office shall 
include in the abstract and/or description of said 
application the same disclosure on biodiversity, 
genetic resources or materials, associated tra-
ditional knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, 
systems and practices utilized in or which formed 
as basis in the development of the subject matter 
contained in the said application, notwithstanding 
that such disclosure may not be required for 
the grant or issuance of certificate of IPR 
registration. 

85
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
i. The [Research and Development Institutes] 
RDI shall provide the [Government Funding 
Agencies] GFA with a written disclosure on 
the following: (1) any biodiversity, genetic 
resources or materials, associated traditional 
knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, sys-
tems and practices utilized in or which formed 
as basis in the development of the subject 
matter contained in the IPR application; (2) 
the primary source of any biodiversity, genetic 
resources or materials, associated traditional 
knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, sys-
tems and practices utilized in or which formed 
as basis in the subject matter contained in the 
IPR application; or (3) the secondary source, 
if no information about the primary source 
is available.
ii. The disclosure requirement under this 
section shall apply when the subject matter 
contained in a national or international IPR
application is directly based on any bio-
diversity, genetic resources or materials, 
traditional knowledge, and indigenous 
knowledge, systems and practices to 
which the RDI has had access to prior to 
the filing of the IPR application. The subject 
matter contained in the IPR application must 
depend on the specific properties of, or must 
be consciously derived from, such biodiversity 
and genetic resource or materials, traditional 
knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, sys-
tems and practices.
iii. Where the RDI, for reasons beyond 
its control, does not have the necessary 
information to fulfill the disclosure re -
quirement pertaining to any biodiversity, 
genetic resources or materials, traditional 
knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, 
systems and practices, such as, for instance, 
where a plant stored in a gene bank was 
collected decades ago and no information 
about its source exists, the RDI shall submit 
an affidavit from its researcher/s that the 
latter do not have the necessary information 
or that the source is unknown, and state the 
reasons thereof. The GFA shall review the 
affidavit to determine if this will constitute 
compliance with the disclosure requirement 
under this rule.
[…]
v. A national or international IPR application 
filed by the RDI before
the appropriate IP office shall include in the 
abstract and/or description of said application 
the same disclosure on biodiversity, genetic 
resources or materials, associated tradition-
al knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, 
systems and practices utilized in or which 
formed as basis in the development of the 
subject matter contained in the said appli-
cation, notwithstanding that such disclosure 
may not be required for the grant or issuance 
of certificate of IPR registration.
i. The [Research and Development Institutes] RDI 
shall provide the [Government Funding Agencies] 
GFA with a written disclosure on the following: (1) 
any biodiversity, genetic resources or mate-
rials, associated traditional knowledge, and 
indigenous knowledge, systems and practices 
utilized in or which formed as basis in the 
development of the subject matter contained 
in the IPR application; (2) the primary source 
of any biodiversity, genetic resources or 
materials, associated traditional knowledge, 
and indigenous knowledge, systems and 
practices utilized in or which formed as basis 
in the subject matter contained in the IPR 
application; or (3) the secondary source, if no 
information about the primary source is available.
[…]
iii. Where the RDI, for reasons beyond its control, 
does not have the necessary information to fulfill 
the disclosure requirement pertaining to any 
biodiversity, genetic resources or materials, 
traditional knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, 
systems and practices, such as, for instance, 
where a plant stored in a gene bank was collected 
decades ago and no information about its source 
exists, the RDI shall submit an affidavit from 
its researcher/s that the latter do not have 
the necessary information or that the source 
is unknown, and state the reasons thereof . 
The GFA shall review the affidavit to determine if 
this will constitute compliance with the disclosure 
requirement under this rule.
[…]
v. A national or international IPR application filed 
by the RDI before the appropriate IP office shall 
include in the abstract and/or description of said 
application the same disclosure on biodiversity, 
genetic resources or materials, associat -
ed traditional knowledge, and indigenous 
knowledge, systems and practices utilized in 
or which formed as basis in the development 
of the subject matter contained in the said 
application, notwithstanding that such disclosure 
may not be required for the grant or issuance of 
certificate of IPR registration.
[…]
v. A national or international IPR application filed 
by the RDI before the appropriate IP office shall 
include in the abstract and/or description of said 
application the same disclosure on biodiversity, 
genetic resources or materials, associated tra-
ditional knowledge, and indigenous knowledge, 
systems and practices utilized in or which formed 
as basis in the development of the subject matter 
contained in the said application, notwithstanding 
that such disclosure may not be required for 
the grant or issuance of certificate of IPR 
registration. 

86
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Romania Implementing Regulations of the Patent Law No. 64/1991 
(approved by Government Decision No. 547/2008)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=8457)
ARTICLE 16
Description of the invention
Traditional knowledge 
ARTICLE 16
Description of the invention
(1) The description of the invention according 
to Art. 14 paragraph (1) letter c) of the
Law shall contain the following:
[…]
c) presentation of the prior art considered by 
the applicant to be useful for understanding, 
performing the documentary search and 
examining the claimed invention, with the 
indication of the documents which substan-
tiate it; at least one solution considered to be 
the closest to the claimed invention shall be 
presented; where the prior art also contains 
traditional knowledge, this and its source, 
if known, shall explicitly be indicated in the 
description;
[…]
ARTICLE 16
Description of the invention
(1) The description of the invention according to 
Art. 14 paragraph (1) letter c) of the
Law shall contain the following:
[…]
c) presentation of the prior art considered by 
the applicant to be useful for understanding, 
performing the documentary search and exam-
ining the claimed invention, with the indication 
of the documents which substantiate it; at least 
one solution considered to be the closest to the 
claimed invention shall be presented; where the 
prior art also contains traditional knowledge, this 
and its source, if known, shall explicitly be 
indicated in the description;
[…]
Law No. 64/1991 on Patents (as amended up to Law 
No. 83/2014)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/15734) 
Art. 53 – (1) Failure to meet one or more of 
the formal requirements concerning the patent 
application shall only constitute grounds for re-
vocation or cancellation of the patent, either 
wholly or in part, where said failure resulted 
from fraudulent intentions.
(2) A patent shall not be revoked or cancelled, 
either wholly or in part, without giving the owner 
the possibility to present observations concerning 
the revocation or cancellation and to make, in a 
reasonable period of time, amendments or correc-
tions allowed by the Law and the corresponding 
implementing regulations.
Samoa Intellectual Property Act 2011
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=13492)
Article 7
biological material or knowledge available within 
any local or indigenous community
Article 7- Application for a patent
[…]
(3) An application must contain the following:
[…]
(g) a statement stating whether or not the 
invention for which protection is claimed is 
based on knowledge available within any 
local or indigenous community whether 
from Samoa or elsewhere;
(h) a statement disclosing the source and 
geographical origin of any biological material 
used for the invention;
[…]
(10) Subject to subsection (11), if the applica-
tion is based on or derived from biological 
material or knowledge available within 
any local or indigenous community the 
Registrar may direct the applicant to furnish 
evidence as to the applicant’s title or authority 
to make use of such material or knowledge.
[…]
22. Application for an innovation patent
[…]
(3) An application must contain:
[…]
Article 7- Application for a patent
[…]
(3) An application must contain the following:
[…]
(g) a statement stating whether or not the 
invention for which protection is claimed 
is based on knowledge available within any 
local or indigenous community whether from 
Samoa or elsewhere;
(h) a statement disclosing the source and 
geographical origin of any biological material 
used for the invention;
[…]
(10) Subject to subsection (11), if the application 
is based on or derived from biological material or 
knowledge available within any local or indigenous 
community the Registrar may direct the applicant 
to furnish evidence as to the applicant’s title 
or authority to make use of such material or 
knowledge.
[…]
22. Application for an innovation patent
[…]
(3) An application must contain:
[…]
Article 7- Application for a patent
[…]
(12) If an applicant fails to provide evidence as 
directed by the Registrar under subsection (10), 
the Registrar may, cease to deal further with 
the application.
17. Invalidation- (1) Any interested person may 
apply to the Supreme Court to invalidate a patent.
(2) The Supreme Court must invalidate the patent 
if the applicant proves that:
(a) any of the requirements of sections 5 and 
sections 7 to 10 are not fulfilled;
[…]
22. Application for an innovation patent
[…]
(12) When an applicant fails to provide evidence 
as directed by the Registrar under subsection 
(10), the Registrar may cease to deal further 
with the application.

87
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Romania Implementing Regulations of the Patent Law No. 64/1991 
(approved by Government Decision No. 547/2008)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=8457)
ARTICLE 16
Description of the invention
Traditional knowledge 
ARTICLE 16
Description of the invention
(1) The description of the invention according 
to Art. 14 paragraph (1) letter c) of the
Law shall contain the following:
[…]
c) presentation of the prior art considered by 
the applicant to be useful for understanding, 
performing the documentary search and 
examining the claimed invention, with the 
indication of the documents which substan-
tiate it; at least one solution considered to be 
the closest to the claimed invention shall be 
presented; where the prior art also contains 
traditional knowledge, this and its source, 
if known, shall explicitly be indicated in the 
description;
[…]
ARTICLE 16
Description of the invention
(1) The description of the invention according to 
Art. 14 paragraph (1) letter c) of the
Law shall contain the following:
[…]
c) presentation of the prior art considered by 
the applicant to be useful for understanding, 
performing the documentary search and exam-
ining the claimed invention, with the indication 
of the documents which substantiate it; at least 
one solution considered to be the closest to the 
claimed invention shall be presented; where the 
prior art also contains traditional knowledge, this 
and its source, if known, shall explicitly be 
indicated in the description;
[…]
Law No. 64/1991 on Patents (as amended up to Law 
No. 83/2014)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/15734) 
Art. 53 – (1) Failure to meet one or more of 
the formal requirements concerning the patent 
application shall only constitute grounds for re-
vocation or cancellation of the patent, either 
wholly or in part, where said failure resulted 
from fraudulent intentions.
(2) A patent shall not be revoked or cancelled, 
either wholly or in part, without giving the owner 
the possibility to present observations concerning 
the revocation or cancellation and to make, in a 
reasonable period of time, amendments or correc-
tions allowed by the Law and the corresponding 
implementing regulations.
Samoa Intellectual Property Act 2011
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=13492)
Article 7
biological material or knowledge available within 
any local or indigenous community
Article 7- Application for a patent
[…]
(3) An application must contain the following:
[…]
(g) a statement stating whether or not the 
invention for which protection is claimed is 
based on knowledge available within any 
local or indigenous community whether 
from Samoa or elsewhere;
(h) a statement disclosing the source and 
geographical origin of any biological material 
used for the invention;
[…]
(10) Subject to subsection (11), if the applica-
tion is based on or derived from biological 
material or knowledge available within 
any local or indigenous community the 
Registrar may direct the applicant to furnish 
evidence as to the applicant’s title or authority 
to make use of such material or knowledge.
[…]
22. Application for an innovation patent
[…]
(3) An application must contain:
[…]
Article 7- Application for a patent
[…]
(3) An application must contain the following:
[…]
(g) a statement stating whether or not the 
invention for which protection is claimed 
is based on knowledge available within any 
local or indigenous community whether from 
Samoa or elsewhere;
(h) a statement disclosing the source and 
geographical origin of any biological material 
used for the invention;
[…]
(10) Subject to subsection (11), if the application 
is based on or derived from biological material or 
knowledge available within any local or indigenous 
community the Registrar may direct the applicant 
to furnish evidence as to the applicant’s title 
or authority to make use of such material or 
knowledge.
[…]
22. Application for an innovation patent
[…]
(3) An application must contain:
[…]
Article 7- Application for a patent
[…]
(12) If an applicant fails to provide evidence as 
directed by the Registrar under subsection (10), 
the Registrar may, cease to deal further with 
the application.
17. Invalidation- (1) Any interested person may 
apply to the Supreme Court to invalidate a patent.
(2) The Supreme Court must invalidate the patent 
if the applicant proves that:
(a) any of the requirements of sections 5 and 
sections 7 to 10 are not fulfilled;
[…]
22. Application for an innovation patent
[…]
(12) When an applicant fails to provide evidence 
as directed by the Registrar under subsection 
(10), the Registrar may cease to deal further 
with the application.

88
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
(g) a statement stating whether or not the 
invention for which protection is claimed is 
based on knowledge available within any 
local or indigenous community whether 
from Samoa or elsewhere; and (h) a state-
ment disclosing the source and geographical 
origin of any biological material used for 
the invention;
[…]
(10) Subject to subsection (11), if the applica-
tion is based on or derived from biological 
material or knowledge available within 
any local or indigenous community the 
Registrar may direct the applicant to furnish 
evidence as to the applicant’s title or authority 
to make use of such material or knowledge.
(g) a statement stating whether or not the 
invention for which protection is claimed is 
based on knowledge available within any local 
or indigenous community whether from Samoa 
or elsewhere; and (h) a statement disclosing 
the source and geographical origin of any 
biological material used for the invention;
[…]
(10) Subject to subsection (11), if the application 
is based on or derived from biological material or 
knowledge available within any local or indigenous 
community the Registrar may direct the applicant 
to furnish evidence as to the applicant’s title 
or authority to make use of such material or 
knowledge.
28. Invalidation-(1) Any interested person may 
apply to the Registrar to invalidate an innova-
tion patent.
(2) The Registrar must invalidate the innovation 
patent if the applicant proves that:
[…]
(b) the description and the claims do not comply 
with the requirements of section 20 and sections 
22, to 25;
[…]
South Africa Patents Amendment Act 2005 (Act No. 20 of 2005)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=5765)
(Section 2)
genetic resource
indigenous biological resource
traditional knowledge
Genetic resource means
(a) any indigenous genetic material; or
(b) the genetic potential or characteristics of any 
indigenous species.
Indigenous biological resource means an indig-
enous biological resource as defined in section 
1 of the National Environmental Management: 
Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No. 10 of 2004).
Traditional knowledge means the knowledge 
that an indigenous community has regarding 
the use of an indigenous biological resource or 
a genetic resource. 
Amendment of section 30 of Act 57 of 1978, 
as amended by section 33 of Act 38 of 1997 
2. Section 30 of the principal Act is hereby 
amended by the insertion after subsection 25 
(3) of the following subsections:
“(3A) Every applicant who lodges an applica-
tion for a patent accompanied by a complete 
specification shall, before acceptance of 
the application, lodge with the registrar a 
statement in the prescribed manner stating 
whether or not the invention for which pro-
tection is claimed is based on or derived from 
an indigenous biological resource, genetic 
resource, or traditional knowledge or use.
(3B) The registrar shall call upon the applicant 
to furnish proof in the prescribed manner as 
to his or her title or authority to make use of 
the indigenous biological resource, genetic 
resource, or of the traditional knowledge 
or use if an applicant lodges a statement 
that acknowledges that the invention for 
which protection is claimed is based on 
or derived from an indigenous biological 
resource, genetic resource, or traditional 
knowledge or use.”.
Amendment of section 30 of Act 57 of 1978, as 
amended by section 33 of Act 38 of 1997
2. Section 30 of the principal Act is hereby amend-
ed by the insertion after subsection 25
(3) of the following subsections:
“(3A) Every applicant who lodges an application for 
a patent accompanied by a complete specification 
shall, before acceptance of the application, lodge 
with the registrar a statement in the prescribed 
manner stating whether or not the invention 
for which protection is claimed is based on 
or derived from an indigenous biological 
resource, genetic resource, or traditional 
knowledge or use.
(3B) The registrar shall call upon the applicant 
to furnish proof in the prescribed manner as 
to his or her title or authority to make use of 
the indigenous biological resource, genetic 
resource, or of the traditional knowledge or 
use if an applicant lodges a statement that 
acknowledges that the invention for which 
protection is claimed is based on or derived 
from an indigenous biological resource, genet-
ic resource, or traditional knowledge or use.”.
Section 61
(1) Any person may at any time apply in the 
prescribed manner for the revocation of a patent 
on any of the following grounds only, namely
[…]
(g) that the prescribed declaration lodged in 
respect of the application for the patent or the 
statement lodged in terms of section 30(3A) 
contains a false statement or representation 
which is material and which the patentee knew 
or ought reasonably to have known to be false 
at the time when the declaration statement or 
representation was made.
Spain Law No. 24/2015 of July 24, 2015, on Patents (as amended 
by Law No. 6/2018 of July 3, 2018)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/16711)
Article 23(2)
biological material
Article 23. Application requirements
[…]
2. An application concerning an invention 
relating to biological material of plant or 
animal origin shall show the geographical 
origin or source of said material if such data 
are known. This information shall not prejudice 
the validity of the patent.
[…]
Article 23. Application requirements
[…]
2. An application concerning an invention 
relating to biological material of plant or animal 
origin shall show the geographical origin 
or source of said material if such data are 
known. This information shall not prejudice the 
validity of the patent.
In the cases provided for in Regulation (EU) No 
511/2014 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of April 16, 2014 concerning compliance 
measures for users of the Nagoya Protocol on 
access to genetic resources and fair and equitable 
sharing of benefits arising from their use in the 
Union, the patent application shall also include, 
to the extent determined in the Regulation, the 
information that users of such resources are 
required to retain, pursuant to the provisions 
of the Regulation . This information shall not 
prejudice the validity of the patent.
Article 23. Application requirements
[…]
2. An application concerning an invention relating 
to biological material of plant or animal origin shall 
show the geographical origin or source of said 
material if such data are known. This information 
shall not prejudice the validity of the patent.
In the cases provided for in Regulation (EU) No 
511/2014 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of April 16, 2014 concerning compliance 
measures for users of the Nagoya Protocol on 
access to genetic resources and fair and equitable 
sharing of benefits arising from their use in the 
Union, the patent application shall also include, 
to the extent determined in the Regulation, the 
information that users of such resources are 
required to retain, pursuant to the provisions 
of the Regulation. This information shall not 
prejudice the validity of the patent either.

89
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
(g) a statement stating whether or not the 
invention for which protection is claimed is 
based on knowledge available within any 
local or indigenous community whether 
from Samoa or elsewhere; and (h) a state-
ment disclosing the source and geographical 
origin of any biological material used for 
the invention;
[…]
(10) Subject to subsection (11), if the applica-
tion is based on or derived from biological 
material or knowledge available within 
any local or indigenous community the 
Registrar may direct the applicant to furnish 
evidence as to the applicant’s title or authority 
to make use of such material or knowledge.
(g) a statement stating whether or not the 
invention for which protection is claimed is 
based on knowledge available within any local 
or indigenous community whether from Samoa 
or elsewhere; and (h) a statement disclosing 
the source and geographical origin of any 
biological material used for the invention;
[…]
(10) Subject to subsection (11), if the application 
is based on or derived from biological material or 
knowledge available within any local or indigenous 
community the Registrar may direct the applicant 
to furnish evidence as to the applicant’s title 
or authority to make use of such material or 
knowledge.
28. Invalidation-(1) Any interested person may 
apply to the Registrar to invalidate an innova-
tion patent.
(2) The Registrar must invalidate the innovation 
patent if the applicant proves that:
[…]
(b) the description and the claims do not comply 
with the requirements of section 20 and sections 
22, to 25;
[…]
South Africa Patents Amendment Act 2005 (Act No. 20 of 2005)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=5765)
(Section 2)
genetic resource
indigenous biological resource
traditional knowledge
Genetic resource means
(a) any indigenous genetic material; or
(b) the genetic potential or characteristics of any 
indigenous species.
Indigenous biological resource means an indig-
enous biological resource as defined in section 
1 of the National Environmental Management: 
Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No. 10 of 2004).
Traditional knowledge means the knowledge 
that an indigenous community has regarding 
the use of an indigenous biological resource or 
a genetic resource. 
Amendment of section 30 of Act 57 of 1978, 
as amended by section 33 of Act 38 of 1997 
2. Section 30 of the principal Act is hereby 
amended by the insertion after subsection 25 
(3) of the following subsections:
“(3A) Every applicant who lodges an applica-
tion for a patent accompanied by a complete 
specification shall, before acceptance of 
the application, lodge with the registrar a 
statement in the prescribed manner stating 
whether or not the invention for which pro-
tection is claimed is based on or derived from 
an indigenous biological resource, genetic 
resource, or traditional knowledge or use.
(3B) The registrar shall call upon the applicant 
to furnish proof in the prescribed manner as 
to his or her title or authority to make use of 
the indigenous biological resource, genetic 
resource, or of the traditional knowledge 
or use if an applicant lodges a statement 
that acknowledges that the invention for 
which protection is claimed is based on 
or derived from an indigenous biological 
resource, genetic resource, or traditional 
knowledge or use.”.
Amendment of section 30 of Act 57 of 1978, as 
amended by section 33 of Act 38 of 1997
2. Section 30 of the principal Act is hereby amend-
ed by the insertion after subsection 25
(3) of the following subsections:
“(3A) Every applicant who lodges an application for 
a patent accompanied by a complete specification 
shall, before acceptance of the application, lodge 
with the registrar a statement in the prescribed 
manner stating whether or not the invention 
for which protection is claimed is based on 
or derived from an indigenous biological 
resource, genetic resource, or traditional 
knowledge or use.
(3B) The registrar shall call upon the applicant 
to furnish proof in the prescribed manner as 
to his or her title or authority to make use of 
the indigenous biological resource, genetic 
resource, or of the traditional knowledge or 
use if an applicant lodges a statement that 
acknowledges that the invention for which 
protection is claimed is based on or derived 
from an indigenous biological resource, genet-
ic resource, or traditional knowledge or use.”.
Section 61
(1) Any person may at any time apply in the 
prescribed manner for the revocation of a patent 
on any of the following grounds only, namely
[…]
(g) that the prescribed declaration lodged in 
respect of the application for the patent or the 
statement lodged in terms of section 30(3A) 
contains a false statement or representation 
which is material and which the patentee knew 
or ought reasonably to have known to be false 
at the time when the declaration statement or 
representation was made.
Spain Law No. 24/2015 of July 24, 2015, on Patents (as amended 
by Law No. 6/2018 of July 3, 2018)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/16711)
Article 23(2)
biological material
Article 23. Application requirements
[…]
2. An application concerning an invention 
relating to biological material of plant or 
animal origin shall show the geographical 
origin or source of said material if such data 
are known. This information shall not prejudice 
the validity of the patent.
[…]
Article 23. Application requirements
[…]
2. An application concerning an invention 
relating to biological material of plant or animal 
origin shall show the geographical origin 
or source of said material if such data are 
known. This information shall not prejudice the 
validity of the patent.
In the cases provided for in Regulation (EU) No 
511/2014 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of April 16, 2014 concerning compliance 
measures for users of the Nagoya Protocol on 
access to genetic resources and fair and equitable 
sharing of benefits arising from their use in the 
Union, the patent application shall also include, 
to the extent determined in the Regulation, the 
information that users of such resources are 
required to retain, pursuant to the provisions 
of the Regulation . This information shall not 
prejudice the validity of the patent.
Article 23. Application requirements
[…]
2. An application concerning an invention relating 
to biological material of plant or animal origin shall 
show the geographical origin or source of said 
material if such data are known. This information 
shall not prejudice the validity of the patent.
In the cases provided for in Regulation (EU) No 
511/2014 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of April 16, 2014 concerning compliance 
measures for users of the Nagoya Protocol on 
access to genetic resources and fair and equitable 
sharing of benefits arising from their use in the 
Union, the patent application shall also include, 
to the extent determined in the Regulation, the 
information that users of such resources are 
required to retain, pursuant to the provisions 
of the Regulation. This information shall not 
prejudice the validity of the patent either.

90
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Sweden Regulation (2004:162) Amending the Patents Decree
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=3672)
Article 5a
biological material of plant or animal origin
Article 5a.
If an invention concerns biological material 
of plant or animal origin or if it uses such 
material, the patent application shall include 
information on the geographical origin of such 
material, if this is known. If the origin is not 
known, this shall be indicated.
Lack of information on the geographical origin 
or on the knowledge of the applicant regarding 
the origin is without prejudice to the processing 
of the patent application or the validity of the 
rights arising from a patent granted.
Article 5a.
If an invention concerns biological material of 
plant or animal origin or if it uses such material, 
the patent application shall include information 
on the geographical origin of such material, 
if this is known. If the origin is not known, 
this shall be indicated.
Lack of information on the geographical origin or 
on the knowledge of the applicant regarding the 
origin is without prejudice to the processing of 
the patent application or the validity of the rights 
arising from a patent granted. 
Article 5a.
If an invention concerns biological material of 
plant or animal origin or if it uses such material, 
the patent application shall include information 
on the geographical origin of such material, if 
this is known. If the origin is not known, this 
shall be indicated.
Lack of information on the geographical origin 
or on the knowledge of the applicant regarding 
the origin is without prejudice to the processing 
of the patent application or the validity of the 
rights arising from a patent granted. 
Switzerland Federal Act of June 25, 1954 on Patents for Inventions 
(status as of January 1, 2012)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=11895)
Article 49a
Genetic resource; traditional knowledge of indig-
enous or local communities 
Article 49a
1. The patent application must contain infor-
mation on the source:
a. of the genetic resource to which the in-
ventor or the patent applicant had access, 
provided the invention is directly based 
on this resource;
b. of traditional knowledge of indigenous or 
local communities to which the inventor or 
the patent applicant had access, provided 
the invention is directly based on this 
knowledge. 
Article 49a
1. The patent application must contain informa-
tion on the source:
a. of the genetic resource to which the inventor 
or the patent applicant had access, provided 
the invention is directly based on this resource;
b. of traditional knowledge of indigenous 
or local communities to which the inventor or 
the patent applicant had access, provided the 
invention is directly based on this knowledge.
2. If the source is unknown to the inventor 
or the patent applicant, the patent applicant 
must confirm this in writing.
Article 59
[…]
2. If the patent application does not meet the 
other requirements of this Act or the Ordinance, 
the Institute shall set a time limit for the 
patent applicant by which the deficiencies 
must be remedies.
Article 59(a)
3. The Institute shall reject the patent appli -
cation if:
[…]
b. the deficiencies mentioned in Article 59 para-
graph 2 have not been remedied.
Art. 81a
1. Any person who wilfully provides false infor-
mation under Article 49a is liable to a fine of up 
to 100,000 francs.
2. The court may order the publication of the 
judgment.
Uganda The Industrial Property Act, 2014
https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/16480
21. Application for a patent.
[…]
(8)
biological resources, traditional knowledge
21. Application for a patent.
[…]
(8)
The description shall contain a clear identi-
fication of the origin of genetic or biological 
resources collected in the territory of Uganda 
and that were directly or indirectly used in the 
making of the claimed invention as well as of 
any element of traditional knowledge associ-
ated or not with those resources and that was 
directly or indirectly used in the making of the 
claimed invention without the prior informed 
consent of its individual or collective creators.
21. Application for a patent.
[…]
(8)
The description shall contain a clear identification 
of the origin of genetic or biological resources 
collected in the territory of Uganda and that 
were directly or indirectly used in the making 
of the claimed invention as well as of any 
element of traditional knowledge associated 
or not with those resources and that was 
directly or indirectly used in the making of 
the claimed invention without the prior informed 
consent of its individual or collective creators.
Section 90
[…]
(3) The court shall revoke or invalidate the 
registration of the patent or the utility model or 
industrial design on any of the following
grounds that—
[…]
(f) the patent does not fully describe and ascertain 
the invention and the manner in which it is to 
be performed;
Vanuatu Patents Act No. 2 of 2003
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=10727)
PART 12
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
REGISTRATION OF PATENT INVOLVING 
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
47. […]
Indigenous knowledge
[…]
PART 12
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
REGISTRATION OF PATENT INVOLVING 
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
47. […]
(2) The Registrar must not grant a patent for 
an invention that is based on, arose out of, 
or incorporates elements of, indigenous 
knowledge unless:
(a) the custom owners of the indigenous 
knowledge have given their prior informed 
consent to the grant; and (b) the applicant 
and the custom owners have entered into an 
agreement on the payment by the applicant 
to the custom owners of an equitable share 
of the benefits from exploiting the patent.
PART 12
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
REGISTRATION OF PATENT INVOLVING 
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
47. […]
(2) The Registrar must not grant a patent for an 
invention that is based on, arose out of, or incorpo-
rates elements of, indigenous knowledge unless:
(a) the custom owners of the indigenous 
knowledge have given their prior informed 
consent to the grant; and
(b) the applicant and the custom owners have 
entered into an agreement on the payment 
by the applicant to the custom owners of an 
equitable share of the benefits from exploiting 
the patent.
PART 12
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
REGISTRATION OF PATENT INVOLVING 
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
47. […]
(4) If an agreement mentioned in subsection (2) 
or (3) has not been entered into within 12 months 
after the patent application has been lodged:
(a) the Registrar may grant the patent; and
(b) the owner may exploit the patent; and
(c) the Registrar is to determine the amount 
payable to the custom owners or the National 
Council of Chiefs by the owner of the patent, 
being payment of an equitable share of the 
benefits from exploiting the patent.

91
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Sweden Regulation (2004:162) Amending the Patents Decree
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=3672)
Article 5a
biological material of plant or animal origin
Article 5a.
If an invention concerns biological material 
of plant or animal origin or if it uses such 
material, the patent application shall include 
information on the geographical origin of such 
material, if this is known. If the origin is not 
known, this shall be indicated.
Lack of information on the geographical origin 
or on the knowledge of the applicant regarding 
the origin is without prejudice to the processing 
of the patent application or the validity of the 
rights arising from a patent granted.
Article 5a.
If an invention concerns biological material of 
plant or animal origin or if it uses such material, 
the patent application shall include information 
on the geographical origin of such material, 
if this is known. If the origin is not known, 
this shall be indicated.
Lack of information on the geographical origin or 
on the knowledge of the applicant regarding the 
origin is without prejudice to the processing of 
the patent application or the validity of the rights 
arising from a patent granted. 
Article 5a.
If an invention concerns biological material of 
plant or animal origin or if it uses such material, 
the patent application shall include information 
on the geographical origin of such material, if 
this is known. If the origin is not known, this 
shall be indicated.
Lack of information on the geographical origin 
or on the knowledge of the applicant regarding 
the origin is without prejudice to the processing 
of the patent application or the validity of the 
rights arising from a patent granted. 
Switzerland Federal Act of June 25, 1954 on Patents for Inventions 
(status as of January 1, 2012)
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=11895)
Article 49a
Genetic resource; traditional knowledge of indig-
enous or local communities 
Article 49a
1. The patent application must contain infor-
mation on the source:
a. of the genetic resource to which the in-
ventor or the patent applicant had access, 
provided the invention is directly based 
on this resource;
b. of traditional knowledge of indigenous or 
local communities to which the inventor or 
the patent applicant had access, provided 
the invention is directly based on this 
knowledge. 
Article 49a
1. The patent application must contain informa-
tion on the source:
a. of the genetic resource to which the inventor 
or the patent applicant had access, provided 
the invention is directly based on this resource;
b. of traditional knowledge of indigenous 
or local communities to which the inventor or 
the patent applicant had access, provided the 
invention is directly based on this knowledge.
2. If the source is unknown to the inventor 
or the patent applicant, the patent applicant 
must confirm this in writing.
Article 59
[…]
2. If the patent application does not meet the 
other requirements of this Act or the Ordinance, 
the Institute shall set a time limit for the 
patent applicant by which the deficiencies 
must be remedies.
Article 59(a)
3. The Institute shall reject the patent appli -
cation if:
[…]
b. the deficiencies mentioned in Article 59 para-
graph 2 have not been remedied.
Art. 81a
1. Any person who wilfully provides false infor-
mation under Article 49a is liable to a fine of up 
to 100,000 francs.
2. The court may order the publication of the 
judgment.
Uganda The Industrial Property Act, 2014
https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/16480
21. Application for a patent.
[…]
(8)
biological resources, traditional knowledge
21. Application for a patent.
[…]
(8)
The description shall contain a clear identi-
fication of the origin of genetic or biological 
resources collected in the territory of Uganda 
and that were directly or indirectly used in the 
making of the claimed invention as well as of 
any element of traditional knowledge associ-
ated or not with those resources and that was 
directly or indirectly used in the making of the 
claimed invention without the prior informed 
consent of its individual or collective creators.
21. Application for a patent.
[…]
(8)
The description shall contain a clear identification 
of the origin of genetic or biological resources 
collected in the territory of Uganda and that 
were directly or indirectly used in the making 
of the claimed invention as well as of any 
element of traditional knowledge associated 
or not with those resources and that was 
directly or indirectly used in the making of 
the claimed invention without the prior informed 
consent of its individual or collective creators.
Section 90
[…]
(3) The court shall revoke or invalidate the 
registration of the patent or the utility model or 
industrial design on any of the following
grounds that—
[…]
(f) the patent does not fully describe and ascertain 
the invention and the manner in which it is to 
be performed;
Vanuatu Patents Act No. 2 of 2003
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=10727)
PART 12
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
REGISTRATION OF PATENT INVOLVING 
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
47. […]
Indigenous knowledge
[…]
PART 12
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
REGISTRATION OF PATENT INVOLVING 
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
47. […]
(2) The Registrar must not grant a patent for 
an invention that is based on, arose out of, 
or incorporates elements of, indigenous 
knowledge unless:
(a) the custom owners of the indigenous 
knowledge have given their prior informed 
consent to the grant; and (b) the applicant 
and the custom owners have entered into an 
agreement on the payment by the applicant 
to the custom owners of an equitable share 
of the benefits from exploiting the patent.
PART 12
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
REGISTRATION OF PATENT INVOLVING 
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
47. […]
(2) The Registrar must not grant a patent for an 
invention that is based on, arose out of, or incorpo-
rates elements of, indigenous knowledge unless:
(a) the custom owners of the indigenous 
knowledge have given their prior informed 
consent to the grant; and
(b) the applicant and the custom owners have 
entered into an agreement on the payment 
by the applicant to the custom owners of an 
equitable share of the benefits from exploiting 
the patent.
PART 12
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
REGISTRATION OF PATENT INVOLVING 
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
47. […]
(4) If an agreement mentioned in subsection (2) 
or (3) has not been entered into within 12 months 
after the patent application has been lodged:
(a) the Registrar may grant the patent; and
(b) the owner may exploit the patent; and
(c) the Registrar is to determine the amount 
payable to the custom owners or the National 
Council of Chiefs by the owner of the patent, 
being payment of an equitable share of the 
benefits from exploiting the patent.

92
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Viet Nam Circular No. 01/2007/TT-BKHCN of February 14, 2007, 
guiding the Implementation of the Government’s Decree 
No. 103/2006/ND-CP of September 22, 2006, detailing and 
guiding the Implementation of a Number of Articles of the 
Law on Intellectual Property regarding Industrial Property
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=5013)
Article 23.11
Gene source and/or traditional knowledge
Article 23.11
Additional provisions applicable to applications 
for registration of inventions concerning gene 
source or traditional knowledge
Apart from the general requirements for 
invention registration applications specified 
at Points 23.1 thru 23.7 of this Circular, an 
application for registration of an invention 
concerning gene source or traditional 
knowledge must also contain documents 
explaining the origin of the gene source and/
or traditional knowledge accessed by the 
inventor or the applicant, if the invention is 
directly based on that gene source and/or 
traditional knowledge. […]
Article 23.11
Additional provisions applicable to applications 
for registration of inventions concerning gene 
source or traditional knowledge
Apart from the general requirements for inven-
tion registration applications specified at Points 
23.1 thru 23.7 of this Circular, an application 
for registration of an invention concerning gene 
source or traditional knowledge must also con-
tain documents explaining the origin of the 
gene source and/or traditional knowledge 
accessed by the inventor or the applicant, if 
the invention is directly based on that gene 
source and/or traditional knowledge. […]
Article 23.11
[…]
If the inventor or the applicant cannot identify 
the origin of the gene source and/or traditional 
knowledge, he/she shall so declare and bear 
responsibility for the truthfulness of his/her 
declaration
Zambia The Patents Act, 2016 (Act No. 40 of 2016)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/18207)
28. […]
invention which utilises genetic resources or 
associated traditional
knowledge or both […]
28. Where an application for the grant 
of a patent involves an invention which 
utilises genetic resources or associated 
traditional knowledge or both, the applicant 
shall disclose —
(a) the country of origin of the genetic re -
sources or associated traditional knowledge 
in accordance with the Convention on Bio-
Diversity; and
(b) the source in the country providing the 
genetic resources or associated traditional 
knowledge.
28. Where an application for the grant of a pat-
ent involves an invention which utilises genetic 
resources or associated traditional knowledge or 
both, the applicant shall disclose —
(a) the country of origin of the genetic re -
sources or associated traditional knowledge 
in accordance with the Convention on Bio-
Diversity; and
(b) the source in the country providing the 
genetic resources or associated traditional 
knowledge.
PART V
Examination, publication and opposition
51. […]
(3) Where the Registrar is of the opinion, after 
conducting an examination, referred to in sub-
section (1), that an application is not compliant 
with the requirements of this Act, the Registrar 
shall notify the applicant, in writing, to make 
relevant amendments to the application, within 
a prescribed period.
(4) Where the applicant fails to, after the noti -
fication referred to in subsection (3), make the 
relevant amendments, the Registrar shall, in 
writing, refuse the application.
[…]
56. A person, including the State, may oppose 
the grant of a patent at any time, within a period 
of three months from the date an application for 
a grant of a patent is advertised, or within such 
further period as the Registrar may allow, and 
before the sealing of the patent, by filing a written 
notice of opposition to the Registrar, stating any 
of the following grounds:
[…]
(l) that the complete specification does not 
disclose or wrongly mentions the source or 
the geographical origin or biological material 
used for the invention;
[…]
(s) that the application is for an invention 
which is traditional knowledge.
The Protection of Traditional Knowledge, Genetic Resources 
and Expressions of Folklore Act, 2016 (Act No. 16 of 2016)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/16181)
36.
[…]
product developed from the genetic resource
[…]
36. An access permit holder shall have the 
following obligations: […]
(l) recognise the locality where the genetic 
resource or traditional knowledge has been 
accessed in an application for protection 
of the product developed from the genetic 
resource;
[…]
36. An access permit holder shall have the fol-
lowing obligations: […]
(l) recognise the locality where the genetic 
resource or traditional knowledge has been 
accessed in an application for protection of the 
product developed from the genetic resource;
[…]

93
Annex: Disclosure requirements table
Country/Region Title Subject Matter Trigger of Disclosure Content of Disclosure Consequences of non-compliance
Viet Nam Circular No. 01/2007/TT-BKHCN of February 14, 2007, 
guiding the Implementation of the Government’s Decree 
No. 103/2006/ND-CP of September 22, 2006, detailing and 
guiding the Implementation of a Number of Articles of the 
Law on Intellectual Property regarding Industrial Property
(http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=5013)
Article 23.11
Gene source and/or traditional knowledge
Article 23.11
Additional provisions applicable to applications 
for registration of inventions concerning gene 
source or traditional knowledge
Apart from the general requirements for 
invention registration applications specified 
at Points 23.1 thru 23.7 of this Circular, an 
application for registration of an invention 
concerning gene source or traditional 
knowledge must also contain documents 
explaining the origin of the gene source and/
or traditional knowledge accessed by the 
inventor or the applicant, if the invention is 
directly based on that gene source and/or 
traditional knowledge. […]
Article 23.11
Additional provisions applicable to applications 
for registration of inventions concerning gene 
source or traditional knowledge
Apart from the general requirements for inven-
tion registration applications specified at Points 
23.1 thru 23.7 of this Circular, an application 
for registration of an invention concerning gene 
source or traditional knowledge must also con-
tain documents explaining the origin of the 
gene source and/or traditional knowledge 
accessed by the inventor or the applicant, if 
the invention is directly based on that gene 
source and/or traditional knowledge. […]
Article 23.11
[…]
If the inventor or the applicant cannot identify 
the origin of the gene source and/or traditional 
knowledge, he/she shall so declare and bear 
responsibility for the truthfulness of his/her 
declaration
Zambia The Patents Act, 2016 (Act No. 40 of 2016)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/18207)
28. […]
invention which utilises genetic resources or 
associated traditional
knowledge or both […]
28. Where an application for the grant 
of a patent involves an invention which 
utilises genetic resources or associated 
traditional knowledge or both, the applicant 
shall disclose —
(a) the country of origin of the genetic re -
sources or associated traditional knowledge 
in accordance with the Convention on Bio-
Diversity; and
(b) the source in the country providing the 
genetic resources or associated traditional 
knowledge.
28. Where an application for the grant of a pat-
ent involves an invention which utilises genetic 
resources or associated traditional knowledge or 
both, the applicant shall disclose —
(a) the country of origin of the genetic re -
sources or associated traditional knowledge 
in accordance with the Convention on Bio-
Diversity; and
(b) the source in the country providing the 
genetic resources or associated traditional 
knowledge.
PART V
Examination, publication and opposition
51. […]
(3) Where the Registrar is of the opinion, after 
conducting an examination, referred to in sub-
section (1), that an application is not compliant 
with the requirements of this Act, the Registrar 
shall notify the applicant, in writing, to make 
relevant amendments to the application, within 
a prescribed period.
(4) Where the applicant fails to, after the noti -
fication referred to in subsection (3), make the 
relevant amendments, the Registrar shall, in 
writing, refuse the application.
[…]
56. A person, including the State, may oppose 
the grant of a patent at any time, within a period 
of three months from the date an application for 
a grant of a patent is advertised, or within such 
further period as the Registrar may allow, and 
before the sealing of the patent, by filing a written 
notice of opposition to the Registrar, stating any 
of the following grounds:
[…]
(l) that the complete specification does not 
disclose or wrongly mentions the source or 
the geographical origin or biological material 
used for the invention;
[…]
(s) that the application is for an invention 
which is traditional knowledge.
The Protection of Traditional Knowledge, Genetic Resources 
and Expressions of Folklore Act, 2016 (Act No. 16 of 2016)
(https://wipolex.wipo.int/en/legislation/details/16181)
36.
[…]
product developed from the genetic resource
[…]
36. An access permit holder shall have the 
following obligations: […]
(l) recognise the locality where the genetic 
resource or traditional knowledge has been 
accessed in an application for protection 
of the product developed from the genetic 
resource;
[…]
36. An access permit holder shall have the fol-
lowing obligations: […]
(l) recognise the locality where the genetic 
resource or traditional knowledge has been 
accessed in an application for protection of the 
product developed from the genetic resource;
[…]

A
Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for GRs and TK
WIPO Publication No. 1047E/19
ISBN 978-92-805-3141-1
World Intellectual Property Organization
34, chemin des Colombettes
P.O. Box 18
CH-1211 Geneva 20
Switzerland
Tel: + 4 1 22 338 91 11
Fax: + 4 1 22 733 54 28
For contact details of WIPO’s 
External Offices visit: 
www.wipo.int/about-wipo/en/offices/ 
2019Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge