Intellectual 
Property and 
Traditional 
Medical 
Knowledge
Background Brief
No. 6

 1Introduction
Traditional medicine is popular throughout the world. In some 
Asian and African countries, a number of the population depend 
on traditional medicine, including for primary healthcare. In many 
developed countries, 70 to 80 percent of the population have 
used some forms of alternative or complementary medicine such 
as acupuncture.1 Many modern drugs and vaccines are based on 
natural resources and associated traditional knowledge. 
Traditional medical knowledge has social, cultural and scientific 
value and is important for many indigenous peoples and local 
communities. Growing commercial and scientific interest in 
traditional medicine systems has led to calls for traditional 
medical knowledge to be better recognized, respected, preserved 
and protected. 
Traditional medical knowledge, such as the medicinal use of 
herbs, is often associated with genetic resources. For instance, 
calanolides, compounds derived from the latex of Calophyllum 
trees found in the Malaysian rainforest, are a potential treatment 
for HIV and certain types of cancer. Because genetic resources 
exist in nature and are not creations of the human mind, they 
cannot be directly protected as intellectual property (IP). They 
are, however, subject to access and benefit-sharing regulations 
under international agreements. 2 This brief focuses on IP 
protection of traditional medical knowledge and does not deal 
specifically with associated genetic resources. 
What is Traditional Medical Knowledge?
The World Health Organization (WHO) defines traditional 
medicine as “the sum total of the knowledge, skills and practices 
based on the theories, beliefs and experiences indigenous 
to different cultures, whether explicable or not, used in the 
1  See WHO traditional medicine strategy 2002-2005 .
2  In particular, the Convention on Biological Diversity, the Nagoya Protocol on 
Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits 
Arising from their Utilization, and the International Treaty on Plant Genetic 
Resources for Food and Agriculture.

2 maintenance of health, as well as in the prevention, diagnosis, 
improvement or treatment of physical and mental illnesses”. 
“Traditional” means that the knowledge is created in a manner 
that reflects community traditions; it is often inter-generational 
and created and held collectively. “Traditional”, therefore, does 
not necessarily mean “old” but is rather related to the way in 
which the knowledge is created, preserved and transmitted. 
Traditional knowledge is generally considered the collective heritage 
of a particular indigenous people or local community. While 
individuals, such as a shaman in Bolivia or a sangoma in South Africa, 
may themselves innovate, what makes their innovations “traditional” 
is that they are based on the community’s collective heritage and the 
innovations are regarded as community-held.
Protection of Traditional Medical Knowledge
Different aspects of traditional medical knowledge are under 
discussion in several international forums, including WHO3 and 
the World Trade Organization (WTO) .4 
The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) is 
primarily concerned with “protection” of traditional medical 
knowledge in the IP sense – protection against unauthorized use 
by third parties. Negotiations currently underway in the WIPO 
Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and 
Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore (IGC) 
seek to develop an international legal instrument that would 
provide effective protection of traditional cultural expressions/
folklore and traditional knowledge (including traditional medical 
knowledge), and address the IP aspects of access to and benefit-
sharing of genetic resources. 
3  WHO promotes the use of traditional medical knowledge for health care. 
See WHO Fact sheet No. 134 “Traditional Medicine”, 
www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs134/en/ .
4  The WTO’s work on access to medicines and IP issues relating to public health is 
guided by the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health; this 
clarifies the flexibilities in IP rules available to governments under the WTO’s 
Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). 
See www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/who_wipo_wto_e.htm .

 3Calls for the protection of traditional medical knowledge are 
often based on a number of cases involving misappropriation 
by unauthorized third parties, who have patented compounds 
derived from traditional medicines without the prior consent 
of traditional medical knowledge holders and without fair 
compensation. Examples of patents based on traditional Indian 
medicine have included the use of turmeric for healing wounds, 
the anti-fungal properties of neem, and a diabetes medicine 
made from extract of jamun. All three patents were subsequently 
revoked. 
In the case of captopril, a drug used to treat hypertension and 
heart failure, no benefits have flowed back to the indigenous 
Brazilian tribe that first used pit viper venom as an arrowhead 
poison. By contrast, the San people of the Kalahari Desert 
have a benefit-sharing agreement with South Africa’s Council 
for Scientific and Industrial Research, which is working with 
pharmaceutical companies to develop dietary supplements 
based on hoodia, a succulent plant well-known to the San for its 
appetite-suppressant qualities.
IP protection can take two forms – positive and defensive 
protection: 
 – Positive protection grants IP rights over the subject matter of 
traditional medical knowledge. This may help communities to 
prevent others from gaining illegitimate access to traditional 
medical knowledge or using it for commercial gain without 
equitably sharing the benefits. It may also enable active 
exploitation of traditional medical knowledge by the originating 
community itself, for example, to build up its own enterprises 
based on that knowledge. 
 – Defensive protection does not grant IP rights over traditional 
medical knowledge but aims to stop such rights from being 
acquired by third parties. Defensive strategies include the use 
of documented traditional medical knowledge to preclude, 
oppose or invalidate patents on claimed inventions that are 
directly based on such knowledge. 

4 Defensive measures undertaken by WIPO include changes to 
the Patent Cooperation Treaty’s Minimum Documentation 
and the International Patent Classification so as to improve 
searches for “prior art” and prevent patents from being granted 
in error. In 2003, it was agreed that certain traditional knowledge 
documentation, such as the Indian Journal of Traditional 
Knowledge and the Korean Journal of Traditional Knowledge, 
should be included in the Patent Cooperation Treaty’s Minimum 
Documentation. In 2006, the International Patent Classification 
was amended to include a traditional knowledge category, which 
covers traditional herbal medicines.
Legislative and Practical Options for Protecting 
Traditional Medical Knowledge
Conventional intellectual property rights
IP rights convey legal ownership over certain intangible assets, 
such as artistic works, commercial designs and pharmaceutical 
technologies. Common types of IP include patents, copyright, 
trademarks, geographical indications and trade secrets. 
Generally speaking, patents are the most important type of IP 
protection for medicines. To obtain a patent, an invention must 
be novel, inventive and industrially applicable . A patent grants 
a set of exclusive rights for a limited time, usually 20 years, that 
allows the inventor to prevent others from making, using, selling, 
offering for sale or importing the patented invention without 
permission. Patents based on traditional medical knowledge 
include patents based on maca, a traditional Peruvian food and 
medicine first cultivated by the Incas, and a patent based on kava, 
a medicinal plant first domesticated in Vanuatu. In China, patent 
law protects new traditional medicine-based products, methods 
of process and new uses of traditional medicine, including herbal 
preparations, extracts from herbal medicines, foods containing 
herbal medicines and methods for preparing herbal formulas.
Holders of traditional medical knowledge can nevertheless 
face significant obstacles in satisfying the conditions required 
to obtain a patent, especially the requirements of novelty and 

 5inventiveness. Because many traditional medicines have been 
used for generations, disseminated in local communities and 
documented in publicly available sources, these medicines may 
fail to qualify for patent protection for lack of novelty. 
Moreover, because herbal medicines typically comprise natural 
products in their raw form, it can be difficult to claim that a 
remedy involves an inventive step. Identifying how the claimed 
invention differs from prior art can also be problematic. That 
said, pharmaceutical drugs derived from natural products usually 
involve some form of alteration or purification, which may be 
considered a novel and inventive step making the drugs eligible 
for patent protection.
A trade secret is information not generally known or reasonably 
discoverable, through which an IP holder can obtain some 
economic advantage. Once trade secrets become known, they 
generally cease to provide protection. Traditional medical 
knowledge holders may choose not to disclose their knowledge 
and keep it secret. In some communities, traditional medical 
knowledge is known and transmitted only to individual healers 
and not to the community at large. 
Other forms of IP may also have a role to play. Trademarks 
protect distinctive signs, such as words, phrases, symbols 
and designs that identify the source of a product. This helps 
consumers identify products with preferred characteristics, 
such as a specific brand of herbal medicine. Trademark rights 
are established through either registration or use in commerce. 
Trademarks have been used to market products based on 
traditional medical knowledge, such as Truong Son Balsam, a 
traditional balm of medical plants from Viet Nam. However, while 
trademarks can help distinguish authentic goods, they do not 
prohibit third parties from using traditional knowledge without 
the trademark or under a different mark. Trademarks cannot be 
used to protect traditional medical knowledge itself. 
A geographical indication is another sort of IP right that can help 
to identify the source of goods. Geographical indications identify 
products as having characteristics associated with their place of 
origin. However, although geographical indications can be used 

6 to distinguish products based on traditional medical knowledge 
specific to a location, they cannot protect against the same use of 
traditional medical knowledge that is not associated with a place. 
The way in which geographical indications are protected varies 
by country, and may require registration or use in commerce. 
As with trademarks, geographical indications can be used only 
for the protection of products based on traditional medical 
knowledge, not the knowledge itself.
Sui generis systems
Some countries have adopted special sui generis laws and 
measures, specifically to protect traditional medical knowledge. 
For example, Thailand’s Act on Protection and Promotion of 
Traditional Thai Medicinal Intelligence protects “formulas” of 
traditional Thai drugs and “texts on traditional Thai medicine”. 
Only those who have registered their IP rights can research, 
develop and produce drugs using traditional medical knowledge. 
At the international level, the international legal instrument on 
the protection of traditional knowledge negotiated by the WIPO 
IGC would embody a sui generis approach.
Documentation
Documenting traditional knowledge includes recording it, 
writing it down, taking pictures of it or filming it – anything 
that preserves it in an accessible form. It is different from the 
traditional ways of preserving and passing on knowledge within 
a community, and can promote or damage a community’s 
interests, depending on how the documentation is carried out. 
Important IP rights may be strengthened or lost when traditional 
knowledge is documented. 
Documenting traditional medical knowledge may be useful for 
the defensive protection of traditional medicine, for example, 
by providing information for prior art searches to preclude 
illegitimate patents (see above under “Defensive Protection”). 
However, documentation does not ensure legal protection for 
the underlying traditional knowledge; it does not prevent this 
knowledge from being used by third parties. In some cases it 
can destroy rights and options if it is undertaken without an IP 

 7strategy in place. The consultation draft of the WIPO Traditional 
Knowledge Documentation Toolkit provides useful practical 
guidance on how to address critical IP-related issues and 
questions before, during and after documentation exercises.
The Traditional Knowledge Digital Library
The Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL), established 
under the auspices of India’s Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (CSIR) and Department of Ayurveda, Yoga 
and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH), 
documents existing literature related to four Indian traditional 
medical knowledge systems – Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Yoga. 
The TKDL provides patent examiners with prior art information, 
in digitized format, in five international languages (English, 
German, French, Japanese and Spanish), so as to prevent the 
erroneous grant of patents. 
The TKDL is not open to the public, and patent offices must not 
reveal the contents of the TKDL to any third party, in order to 
protect India’s interest against possible misuse.
Other options
Other options can form part of the overall menu to protect 
traditional medical knowledge. 
Customary laws and practices may define custodial rights 
and obligations over traditional medical knowledge, including 
obligations to guard it against misuse or improper disclosure. 
They may determine how traditional medical knowledge is to be 
used, how benefits should be shared and how disputes are to be 
settled, as well as many other aspects of the preservation, use 
and exercise of knowledge. For example, in North America, the 
inheritance and transfer of “medicine bundles” within or between 
families is accompanied by the transmission of traditional medical 
knowledge and certain rights to practice, transmit and apply that 
knowledge. 

8 Contracts are another tool that can be used to protect traditional 
medical knowledge. Contractual agreements, such as the San 
people’s agreement on hoodia mentioned earlier, can ensure that 
the grant of IP rights and access to traditional medical knowledge 
is based on prior informed consent and benefit-sharing. In 
another example, traditional healers of Samoa are acknowledged 
in a benefit-sharing agreement concerning the development of 
prostratin, an anti-AIDS compound derived from the Samoan 
native mamala tree.

 9Further Information
Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional 
Knowledge and Traditional Cultural Expressions: 
An Overview (WIPO Publication No. 933), 
www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_933_2020.pdf
Promoting Access to Medical Technologies and Innovation: 
Intersections between Public Health, Intellectual Property and 
Trade (WIPO Publication No. 628), 
www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_628_2020.pdf
A series of briefs, 
www.wipo.int/tk/en/resources/publications.html
Documenting Traditional Knowledge – A Toolkit 
www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_1049.pdf
Database of legislative texts on the protection of traditional 
knowledge and traditional cultural expressions and legislative 
texts relevant to genetic resources, 
www.wipo.int/tk/en/legal_texts/
The WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property 
and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore (IGC), 
www.wipo.int/tk/en/igc/index.html

wipo.int
© WIPO, 2023 /  Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) / The CC license does not apply to non-WIPO content in this publication. 
Cover: Getty Images/Martin Harvey,Max Labeille / WIPO Reference RN2023-5.6EN; DOI: 10.34667/tind.47891