

FAQ's | National Biodiversity Authority

 Skip to main content

भारत सरकार | GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

Skip to main content

Search

A
+

A

A
-

A

A

A

A

English

हिन्दी

Toggle navigation

National Biodiversity Authority

A Statutory Body of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India.

Main navigation

About Us

Introduction

Organogram

Members

Functional Committees

FAQ

Acts & Rules

Act

Rules

State Biodiversity Rules

Notifications & Guidelines

OM for UT's

Public Information

Authority Meetings

Grant-in-Aid

Opportunities

Court-Orders

RTI

BHS

PBR

Tenders

SBB's/BMC

BMC's

SBB's / UT's - Dashboard

Resources

Publications

Reports

Links

Awareness/Training Tools

Media

Event's 

What's New

Press Release

Photo Gallery

ABS Application

ABS e-filing Application Status

Application Process

Forms/Application Fee

Contact Us

FAQ's

About Us

Introduction

Organogram

Members

Functional Committees

FAQ

Search by Question 

1. What is meant by "biological resources"?

As per Section 2(c) of the BD Act, the biological resources include plants, animals, micro-organisms or parts of their genetic material and derivatives (excluding value added products) with actual or potential use or value for humanity, but does not include human genetic material.

2. What is the concept and purpose of “access and benefit sharing”?

ABS mechanism has been evolved under the CBD and Nagoya Protocol to ensure that the users of biological resources share a portion of their gains/profits with the conservers of these resources which serves as an incentive for them to continue their efforts in conserving, preserving and maintaining the biological diversity and TK associated thereto. This works on the principle of equity which contributes to the conservation and sustainable use of the components of biological resources.

3. Why was the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 enacted?

In compliance with our obligations under CBD, the Biological Diversity Act was enacted with the core objectives to conserve the biological resources, ensure sustainable use of its components, and promote the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilisation of such biological resources and or associated knowledge

4. Has India’s status as a signatory to the CBD helped the tribal people and local communities safeguard their TK and derive benefits from its utilisation?

Yes. As a signatory to the CBD, India has enacted BD Act, 2002, to conserve biological resources and associated TK of the tribal people and local communities. The BD Act mandates the establishment of BMCs, at the local level, which documents biological diversity and associated TK through the preparation of People’s Biodiversity Registers (PBRs).
The Act also regulates access to biological resources and associated TK. Access for research or commercial utilisation requires prior informed consent (PIC) of the concerned communities, obtained through the relevant BMCs as provided under Section 41 of the Act. Furthermore, the Act ensures fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the use of biological resources and associated TK with the concerned tribal/ local communities or the original knowledge holders. These provisions empower local communities and help safeguard their TK.

5. What is the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)?

The variety of life and lifeforms referred to as “biodiversity” is the source of support, sustenance and succour to all the lifeforms, including humans, on earth. Rapid loss of biological diversity and its unfair commercial application, owing to a host of reasons - unplanned development, over exploitation, unscientific use and commercial application, piracy from host nation and communities of people etc., all over the world, became a matter of grave concern of humanity. To arrest such a trend and to take measures for its conservation, its sustainable and fair use, a new international legal arrangement was crafted. CBD is the outcome of such a deliberation and the first major international legal arrangement, under the United Nations. Ratified by 196 Countries, it promotes the conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components, and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilisation of genetic resources. The Convention was opened for signature on 5 June 1992 at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (the Rio “Earth Summit”). It remained open for signature until 4 June 1993, by which time it had received 168 signatures. The Convention entered into force on 29 December 1993, which was 90 days after the 30th ratification.

6. How does CBD recognise the biological resources at the country level?

The CBD reaffirms the sovereign rights of the Parties (i.e., member countries) over their biological resources. It encourages countries to facilitate appropriate access to genetic resources by other Parties, subject to their national legislations.
While encouraging access to genetic resources by other Parties, the CBD makes it clear that such access is subject to prior informed consent (PIC) and mutually agreed terms (MAT), as determined by the provider country (country providing the genetic resource(s) and associated traditional knowledge).
Additionally, the CBD promotes the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources, including benefits derived from associated traditional knowledge (TK), innovations, and practices of indigenous and local communities. CBD provides the legal framework for the member countries to evolve their own legislations, with institutions of enforcement for achieving its goals that would include, regulation of access, determination of the terms for benefit sharing, and ensuring fairness and equity in sharing of benefits arising from the commercial application of biodiversity.

7. Whether exemption is applicable for access to the biological resources associated with codified traditional knowledge?

No. Access to biological resources that are associated with codified traditional knowledge is not exempted.

8. How and with whom are the monetary benefits shared?

According to Section 21 of the Act, the determination of fair and equitable benefit sharing arising out of the utilisation of accessed biological resources, their derivatives, innovations and practices associated with their use and applications and knowledge relating thereto, is done in accordance with the mutually agreed terms and conditions between the users and BMC represented by the NBA.
The monetary benefits shall be paid to the National Biodiversity Fund by the users. The NBA then distributes the benefit sharing components to the benefit claimers, which may include individuals, groups of individuals or organisations.

9. Does restructuring within a corporate group (merger, demerger) require fresh NBA approval for already accessed biological resources?

After merger or demerger in the company requires proper intimation to the NBA / SBB is required within 90 days from the completion of that event, from an authorized person of the company who obtained approval from the NBA/SBB. NBA shall decide whether this Agreement shall be amended or a fresh approval is required. The NBA’s decision in this regard shall be final.

10. Does an Indian need approval to report a new species or genus?

Reporting a new species or genus is not a regulated activity under the provisions of the BD Act. However, prior intimation shall be provided to the designated repository in India.

11. How does the BD Act address the concerns relating to the protection of biodiversity-rich areas?

Section 37 (1) of the Act provides that based on the recommendations of the SBB, the State Government may, from time to time, notify in the Official Gazette, areas of biodiversity importance as Biodiversity Heritage Sites under this Act. Further, the SBB shall consult the local body and BMC concerned before making such recommendations. The State Government, in consultation with the Central Government, may frame rules for the management and conservation of all the biodiversity heritage sites as per Section 37(2) of the Act.

12. Whether access to biological resources, which are normally traded as commodities (NTAC), is exempted from NBA approval for IPR?

No, permission is required for the biological resources notified as NTACs if they are utilized in IPR as per Section 40.

13. What is "digital sequence information"?

Digital Sequence Information (DSI) refers to data of genetic information from biological resources, including DNA, RNA, and protein sequences, and other related molecular data.

14. In the case of a Section 7 company accessing genetic material from multiple states to develop multi-parent hybrids, what is the recommended approach for distributing ABS payments — should these be allocated equally among the contributing states or based o

If the applicant is covered under Section 7 of the Act and the applicant intends to access the biological resources from more than one state, prior intimation to all such State Biodiversity Boards shall be given by the applicant for obtaining approval as required under Section 7 of the Act.
To facilitate the process, an online single window system is being developed by the NBA for facilitating the filing of ABS applications with SBB.
The total amount of the accrued benefits shall be shared with the Boards or Councils concerned, proportionately, on a case-by-case basis as per Regulation 11 of the ABS Regulations 2025.

15. Can molecular marker assisted breeding/selection be considered as ‘conventional breeding’ (as this is mentioned under commercial utilization).

Molecular marker-aided breeding/selection cannot be considered as conventional breeding. Conventional breeding generally refers to traditional methods such as selection, hybridization, and back-crossing based on observable traits. In contrast, molecular marker-based selection involves the use of molecular tools and genetic markers to identify and select desirable traits at the DNA level, and therefore falls outside the scope of conventional breeding.

16. Who prepares the biodiversity strategies and action plans for our Country/State(s)?

As per Section 36 of the BD Act, 2002, the Central Government (Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change) shall develop national plans for the conservation, promotion and sustainable use of biological resources. The State Government shall develop state plans for the conservation, promotion and sustainable use of the biological diversity in conformity with the national strategies, plans and programmes, as per Section 36B of the amended BD Act.
In October, 2024, India’s updated national biodiversity strategy and action plan was prepared in alignment with the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework. India released the same in the side event of the COP-16 meeting at Cali, Colombia.

17. Does access to derivatives require approval under the Act?

Yes, as defined under Section 2(c) of the Act, biological resources include ‘derivatives’. Section 2(fa) defines “derivative” as a naturally occurring biochemical compound or metabolism of biological resources, even if it does not contain functional units of heredity. Therefore, access to derivatives for undertaking the activities in the Act requires prior approval.

18. What are the modalities provided in the Act for utilising the benefit sharing amount received by the NBA?

utilising the benefit-sharing amount received by the NBA?
As per Section 27(2) of the Act, the benefit sharing amount realized by the NBA shall be utilised for the following purposes:
channelling benefits to the benefit claimers;
conservation, promotion and sustainable use of biological resources;
Socio-economic development of areas from where such biological resources or TK associated thereto have been accessed in consultation with the BMC. When it is not possible to identify the area from where the biological resources or TK associated thereto have been accessed, the fund shall be utilised for socio-economic development of the area where such biological resources occur; and
For any other activities to meet the purposes of the Act.

19. What is the benefit-sharing obligation for transferring the results of research to a Section 3(2) entity?

The applicant shall be liable to pay up to 5.0% of the monetary benefit received from the transferee, as a benefit-sharing amount, as determined by the NBA on a case-by-case basis.

20. Has there been any amendments to the Biological Diversity Act?

Yes, the BD Act, 2002 has been amended twice as given below:
A new provision Section 52A, was inserted with an enactment of National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 which came into force on October 18, 2010. The appellate jurisdiction under the relevant provisions of the Act has been transferred from the High Court to the National Green Tribunal.
The Biological Diversity (Amendment) Act, 2023 (No. 10 of 2023) published in the Gazette of India, Ext., Pt. II, S.1, vide notification no. CG-DL-E-03082023-247815 dated August 03, 2023. Subsequently, the first corrigendum was issued on 09-08-2023 and second corrigendum was issued on 29-02-2024.

Pagination

 Current page

1

 Page

2

 Page

3

 Page

4

 Page

5

 Page

6

Next page

Next ›

Last page

Last »

FAQ Disclaimer
Version of FAQ:

Date of FAQ: 

Get In Touch

National Biodiversity Authority
5th Floor, Phase I, TICEL Bio Park, CSIR Road
Taramani, Chennai, Tamil Nadu - 600 113
+91-44-2254 2777
Helpdesk Number
📞

+91 44 2254 2777
🕘 9:15 AM – 5:45 PM

|

📅 Monday–Friday (Working Days)
✉

admn@nba.nic.in

Website Links

Contact Us

Disclaimer

FAQ

Feedback

Help

Terms and Conditions 

Web Information Manager

Website policies

Connect with Us

Find Us on G-Map

Scan  X

QR Code for Location  

or
Click to Zoom Our Location

Website Content Managed by National Biodiversity Authority, Government of India