ffi
rmq dq ffiftq61 xrf$Eqrrr
iltlatiomal Biodiversity ltuthority
., {ti{ii: -
't.e' - '(-
ie i)r44
'"-.".,.f,iir,1$j,iriit:irr:r.1r1(l !ililrt:rv grdl {f Flr,l11.'1 irI [ !rr,ltJftT.e'rt, t'rr,rri i,{ (-ilmnl* Lilarr;r, (!^Btt;Fi]t1 :1 :rdli)
df. r. rnm*. qririh.
sqe xfuE
$r. B- Balaii, IFs
Membal- Secretary
t+91 q4 2234 107L . .seuetary@nba.rrir.in
sq EF{. T:ErrrT Er4r qld. *w.inir;u i=.
Tr{t: ir.q6-Bos 1x3 & Trg. TrT.{
Sth floor, TIC€L Elio Park, CSIR Road.
Taramani, Chennei - 60A 113, Tamii l{edu. lndia.
NBA/IPR GEN/33/1 1tl8l25-26 fq6 1
Date: 10.07.2025
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Sub: "Important Notice to Stakeholders Regarding Filing of e - forms pertaining to IPR
(Intellectual Property Rights) Applications under The Biological Diversity (Amendment) Act,
2023" - reg.
It has come to this office attention that many of the stakeholders are incorrectly filing Form
- 3 instead of Form - 8 or Form 7 for forms related to Intellectual Property Rights by persons
covered under Section 7 or Section 3(2) respectively.
Stakeholders are hereby informed that the Biological Diversity Act and the corresponding
Rules have been amended by the Biological Diversity (Amendment) Act, 2023 and the
Biological Diversity (Amendment) Rules, 2024. Accordingly, previous Form III has been
amended to Form - 8 or Form 7 for forms related to Intellectual Property Rights by persons
covered under Section 7 or Section 3(2) respectively.
Revised Filing Requirements:
Previous Form as per
The Biological Diversity
Rules,2004
Amended Forms as per The
Biological Diversity
(Amendment) Rules, 2024
Applicable to
Form-III-Application
for seeking prior approval
of National Biodiversity
Authority for applying for
Intellectual Property Right
Form - 7 - Application for
seeking prior approval on the
National Biodiversity
Authority before grant of
Intellectual Property Rights.
For persons covered
under Section 3(2) of
the Act.
Form - 8 - Application for
registration with the National
Biodiversity Authority before
grant of Intellectual Property
Rights.
For persons covered
under Section 7 of the
Act.
Form - 9 - Application for
seeking prior approval on the
National Biodiversity
Authority for
commercialisation of
Intellectual Property Rights.
For persons covered
under Section 7 of the
Act, post registration
through Form - 8.
Form - 6 - Application for
seeking prior approval to use
the results of research for
obtaining intellectual property
Applicable
transferee
Section 3(2)
to
under

-
o
a
rights by the transferee (section
3(2) person)
Form 10 - Form for
declaration of the use of
biological resource or
associated traditional
knowledge obtained from any
foreign country, in India.
Applicable to Section
3(2) & Section 7
Important Instructions :
Application fees paid to the National Biodiversity Authority will not be refunded under
any circumstances. Therefore, stakeholders are advised to file the correct forms as per their
eligibility and requirements through https://absefiline.nic.inAlBA/loein/auth.
It is hereby informed to all stakeholders that the name of the applicant provided in the
IPR-related forms submitted to the National Biodiversity Authority shall exactly match
the applicant's name as entered with the Intellectual Property Office.
For further clarification, stakeholders may refer to the Biological Diversity (Amendment) Act.
2023, the Biological Diversity (Amendment) Rules. 2024 and Regulation,2025.
(Dr. B. Balaji, t{ lryl6
Member Secretary, NBA,
Chennai